E3. Does becoming self-aware mean becoming a stranger to oneself? 

E3.1. The Ecstasy of "Unselfing": Dissolving the Self in Beauty and the Sublime.
Awareness, particularly through art or nature makes us a stranger to our "brooding self with its hurt vanity" by dissolving it into a greater whole.

E3.1.1. The Burden of the "I": Escaping the Prison of Narcissism through Beauty.
The problem of the "brooding self" and  how vulnerability, art, and beauty act as the necessary mechanisms to shatter the armor of the ego.

E3.1.1.a. The Fortress of the Self vs. The Citizenship of the Universe.
The "brooding self" as a form of confinement (narcissism) and the  necessity of expanding one’s interest to the "Not-Self" to achieve true freedom and justice.

E3.1.1.a_REF1_PH P_Picture on the wall of Freud´s office in his house in London

"Beauty is the form under which the intellect prefers to study the world. All privilege is that of beauty; for there are many beauties; as, of general nature, of the human face and form, of manners, of brain, or method, moral beauty, or beauty of the soul. […]

The question of Beauty takes us out of surfaces, to thinking of the foundations of things. Goethe said, “The beautiful is a manifestation of secret laws of Nature, which, but for this appearance, had been forever concealed from us.” And the working of this deep instinct makes all the excitement — much of it superficial and absurd enough — about works of art, which leads armies of vain travelers every year to Italy, Greece, and Egypt. Every man values every acquisition he makes in the science of beauty, above his possessions. The most useful man in the most useful world, so long as only commodity was served, would remain unsatisfied. But, as fast as he sees beauty, life acquires a very high value. [...]

We ascribe beauty to that which is simple; which has no superfluous parts; which exactly answers its end; which stands related to all things; which is the mean of many extremes. It is the most enduring quality, and the most ascending quality. [...]

Things are pretty, graceful, rich, elegant, handsome, but, until they speak to the imagination, not yet beautiful. This is the reason why beauty is still escaping out of all analysis. It is not yet possessed, it cannot be handled… It is properly not in the form, but in the mind. It instantly deserts possession, and flies to an object in the horizon. If I could put my hand on the north star, would it be as beautiful? The sea is lovely, but when we bathe in it, the beauty forsakes all the near water. For the imagination and senses cannot be gratified at the same time. [...]

The new virtue which constitutes a thing beautiful, is a certain cosmical quality, or, a power to suggest relation to the whole world, and so lift the object out of a pitiful individuality. Every natural feature — sea, sky, rainbow, flowers, musical tone — has in it somewhat which is not private, but universal, speaks of that central benefit which is the soul of Nature, and thereby is beautiful. [...]

All high beauty has a moral element in it… Gross and obscure natures, however decorated, seem impure shambles; but character gives splendor to youth, and awe to wrinkled skin and gray hairs. An adorer of truth we cannot choose but obey, and the woman who has shared with us the moral sentiment — her locks must appear to us sublime. Thus there is a climbing scale of culture, from the first agreeable sensation which a sparkling gem or a scarlet stain affords the eye, up through fair outlines and details of the landscape, features of the human face and form, signs and tokens of thought and character in manners, up to the ineffable mysteries of the intellect."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Essays and Lectures, Beauty)

Read it in the Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2015/06/26/emerson-beauty/?mc_cid=0dbdbd1e47&mc_eid=0b6483decb

"Beauty is the convenient and traditional name of something which art and nature share, and which gives a fairly clear sense to the idea of quality of experience and change of consciousness. I am looking out of my window in an anxious and resentful state of mind, oblivious of my surroundings, brooding perhaps on some damage done to my prestige. Then suddenly I observe a hovering kestrel. In a moment everything is altered. The brooding self with its hurt vanity has disappeared. There is nothing now but kestrel. And when I return to thinking of the other matter it seems less important. And of course this is something which we may also do deliberately: give attention to nature in order to clear our minds of selfish care."
(Murdoch, Sovereignty of good, 1970)

E1.6.C.1.7.b_REF1_LIT.wE3.1.3.

E3.1.1.a_REF2_PH BERTRAND RUSSELL ARGUES THAT THE CHIEF VALUE OF PHILOSOPHY LIES IN LIBERATING THE MIND FROM THE "PRISON" OF NARROW PERSONAL INTERESTS THROUGH THE IMPARTIAL CONTEMPLATION OF THE VAST "NOT-SELF," to achieve a "citizenship of the universe" and a supreme union with the infinite.
"Apart from its utility in showing unsuspected possibilities, philosophy has a value—perhaps its chief value—through the greatness of the objects which it contemplates, and the freedom from narrow and personal aims resulting from this contemplation. The life of the instinctive man is shut up within the circle of his private interests : family and friends may be included, but the outer world is not regarded except as it may help or hinder what comes within the circle of instinctive wishes. In such a life there is something feverish and confined, in comparison with which the philosophic life is calm and free. The private world of instinctive interests is a small one, set in the midst of a great and powerful world which must sooner or later, lay our private world in ruins. Unless we can so enlarge our interests as to include the whole outer world, we remain like a garrison in a beleaguered fortress, knowing that the enemy prevents escape and that ultimate surrender is inevitable. In such a life there is no peace, but a constant strife between the insistence of desire and the powerlessness of will. In one way or another, if our life is to be great and free, we must escape this prison and this strife.

         One way of escape is by philosophic contemplation. Philosophic contemplation does not, in its widest survey, divide the universe into two hostile camps— friends and foes, helpful and hostile, good and bad— it views the whole impartially. Philosophic contemplation, when it is unalloyed, does not aim at proving that the rest of the universe is akin to man. All acquisition of knowledge is an enlargement of the Self, but this enlargement is best attained when it is not directly sought. It is obtained when the desire for knowledge is alone operative, by a study which does not wish in advance that its objects should have this or that character, but adapts the Self to the characters which it finds in its objects. This enlargement of Self is not obtained when, taking the Self as it is, we try to show that the world is so similar to this Self that knowledge of it is possible without any admission of what seems alien. The desire to prove this is a form of self-assertion and, like all self-assertion, it is an obstacle to the growth of Self which it desires, and of which the Self knows that it is capable. Self-assertion, in philosophic speculation as elsewhere, views the world as a means to its own ends ; thus it makes the world of less account than Self, and the Self sets bounds to the greatness of its goods. In contemplation, on the contrary, we start from the not-Self, and through its greatness the boundaries of Self are enlarged ; through the infinity of the universe the mind which contemplates it achieves some share in infinity. [...]

         The true philosophic contemplation, [...], finds its satisfaction in every enlargement of the not-Self, in everything that magnifies the objects contemplated, and thereby the subject contemplating. Everything, in contemplation that is personal or private, everything that depends upon habit, self-interest, or desire, distorts the object, and hence impairs the union which the intellect seeks. By thus making barrier between subject and object, such personal and private things become a prison to the intellect. The free intellect will see as God might see, without a here and now, without hopes and fears, without the trammels of customary beliefs and traditional prejudices, calmly, dispassionately, in the sole and exclusive desire of knowledge—knowledge as impersonal, as purely contemplative, as it is possible for man to attain. Hence also the free intellect will value more the abstract and universal knowledge into which the accidents of private history do not enter, than the knowledge brought by the senses, and dependent, as such knowledge must be, upon an exclusive and personal point of view and a body whose sense-organs distort as much as they reveal.

         The mind which has become accustomed to the freedom and impartiality of philosophic contemplation will preserve something of the same freedom and impartiality in the world of action and emotion. It will view its purposes and desires as parts of the whole, with the absence of insistence that results from seeing them as infinitesimal fragments in a world of which all the rest is unaffected by any one man’s deeds. The impartiality which, in contemplation, is the unalloyed desire for truth, is the very same quality of mind which, in action, is justice, and in emotion is that universal love which can be given to all, and not only to those who are judged useful or admirable. Thus contemplation enlarges not only the objects of our thoughts, but also it makes us citizens of the universe, not only of one walled city at war with all the rest. In this citizenship of the universe consists man’s true freedom, and his liberation from the thraldom of narrow hopes and fears.

         Thus, to sum up our discussion of the value of philosophy ; Philosophy is to be studied, not for the sake of any definite answers to its questions, since no definite answers can, as a rule, be known to be true, but rather for the sake of the questions themselves ; because these questions enlarge our conception of what is possible, enrich our intellectual imagination and diminish the dogmatic assurance which closes the mind against speculation ; but above all because, through the greatness of the universe which philosophy contemplates, the mind also is rendered great, and becomes capable of that union with the universe which constitutes its highest good."
(Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, 1912)

E3.1.1.a_REF3_PH THE GOAL OF WELL-BEING IS "BREAKING THROUGH ONE’S NARCISSISM."
"If “well-being” — [defined as] functioning well as a person, not as an instrument — is the supreme goal of one’s efforts, two specific ways stand out that lead to the attainment of this goal: Breaking through one’s narcissism and breaking through the property structure of one’s existence [...]
Narcissism is an orientation in which all one’s interest and passion are directed to one’s own person: one’s body, mind, feelings, interests… For the narcissistic person, only he and what concerns him are fully real; what is outside, what concerns others, is real only in a superficial sense of perception; that is to say, it is real for one’s senses and for one’s intellect. But it is not real in a deeper sense, for our feeling or understanding. He is, in fact, aware only of what is outside, inasmuch as it affects him. Hence, he has no love, no compassion, no rational, objective judgment. The narcissistic person has built an invisible wall around himself. He is everything, the world is nothing. Or rather: He is the world.."
(Erich Fromm, The Art of Being)

E3.1.1.a_REF3.1_PH DISSOLVING THE "BROODING SELF"
"Narcissism is an orientation in which all one’s interest and passion are directed to one’s own person: one’s body, mind, feelings, interests… For the narcissistic person, only he and what concerns him are fully real; what is outside, what concerns others, is real only in a superficial sense of perception; that is to say, it is real for one’s senses and for one’s intellect. But it is not real in a deeper sense, for our feeling or understanding. He is, in fact, aware only of what is outside, inasmuch as it affects him. Hence, he has no love, no compassion, no rational, objective judgment. The narcissistic person has built an invisible wall around himself. He is everything, the world is nothing. Or rather: He is the world.Fromm writes:
"A person living in this mode is not necessarily very narcissistic. He may have broken through the shell of his narcissism, have an adequate appreciation of reality outside himself, not necessarily be “in love with himself”; he knows who he is and who the others are, and can well distinguish between subjective experience and reality. Nevertheless, he wants everything for himself; has no pleasure in giving, in sharing, in solidarity, in cooperation, in love. He is a closed fortress, suspicious of others, eager to take and most reluctant to give."
(Maria Popova´s review of Erich Fromm's The Art of Being in The Marginalian)

"If a person has the will and the determination to loosen the bars of his prison of narcissism and selfishness, when he has the courage to tolerate the intermittent anxiety, he experiences the first glimpses of joy and strength that he sometimes attains. And only then a decisive new factor enters into the dynamics of the process. This new experience becomes the decisive motivation for going ahead and following the path he has charted… [An] experience of well-being — fleeting and small as it may be — … becomes the most powerful motivation for further progress…
Awareness, will, practice, tolerance of fear and of new experience, they are all necessary if transformation of the individual is to succeed. At a certain point the energy and direction of inner forces have changed to the point where an individual’s sense of identity has changed, too. In the property mode of existence the motto is: “I am what I have.” After the breakthrough it is “I am what I do” (in the sense of unalienated activity); or simply, “I am what I am.”"
(Erich Fromm, The Art of Being)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2016/03/23/erich-fromm-the-art-of-living/?mc_cid=af79031373&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E3.1.1.a_REF4_PH NICK CAVE REFRAMES "SELF-DOUBT" NOT AS A WEAKNESS, BUT AS A "HUMANISING FORCE" THAT KEEPS US "HUMBLE, VULNERABLE, OPEN-MINDED AND CONNECTED TO THE WORLD."
"Do you ever suffer from self-doubt?

A girl was falling in love with me, and while she courted me, she shared a part of herself which was you. I had never heard your music before, and it struck me that you were like me - you and I were born within a 100km radius of one another. The young girl who loved me shared with me friendship, forgiveness, and a figure of alien greatness who at one time came from some place around here.

I now have two young sons Max and Joey. They enjoy listening to your music, they dance around the living room. Joey is an emotional lightning rod who feels the world more intensely than anyone I have ever met. Little Max cannot speak yet, but he sings, and when he smiles you can see clear through into his soul. One day when they are old enough to really understand, I will tell them that you came from here. I will tell them that they can aspire to be more than a person from a place, and maybe they will not end up like their father.
THOMAS, MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA

Dear Thomas,

You sent this letter some time ago and I keep coming back to it, responding to its wonderfully precise and tender heart. I’ve read it to several people, including film director and friend, Andrew Dominik, who basically cried, as did my normally steely assistant, Rachel. It reads like a Raymond Carver story — lean and lovely and sad — a world in every line. I have received and read around forty thousand letters on The Red Hand Files and yours is perhaps my favourite. I am very happy that this letter was written by a guy from my hometown of Melbourne — that makes me proud.

Do I ever feel self-doubt? The answer is yes, very much so. My self-doubt tends to manifest itself in sudden, hot rushes of embarrassment, and usually emerges alongside a loss of playfulness or humour — or rather, when I start to take myself, and indeed life, too seriously. It seems to arise as a countering response to my own sense of self-importance. Self-doubt is common to us all, I suspect, and uncomfortable and unpleasant as it is, a certain amount can be the truest humanising force, keeping us humble, vulnerable, open-minded and connected to the world. But, of course, we need to remain vigilant and not allow our self-doubt to become compulsive — to imprison us, shut us down and make us incapable of forward movement. At these times, it is worth remembering that the world can be funny — as can we — and to not take ourselves too seriously.

But, Thomas, the main reason I am writing to you is to just say thank you for your letter, it is a superb thing, really, and something I will treasure. When I read it to Susie this morning she said, ‘What a lovely man.’ ‘Yeah, I know,’ I said ‘He’s from Melbourne.’

Love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #143 / APRIL 2021)

E3.1.1.a_REF5_PH A_Alexandra Bircken_Valet Stand_2017 /Alexandra Bircken/ ; I_Snoopy_2014

UNSELFING IS THE ACT OF DROPPING THE ARMOR TO RECOGNIZE THE "WOUNDED INNER WORLD" SHARED BY ALL.
"[...] What is virtually impossible to see within a mirror is that the very essence of our humanness, our vulnerability and fragility, is the most beautiful thing we possess.
Yet, when we are young that vulnerability can appear to us as shame or weakness, as we attempt to brace ourselves against what we may see as a brutal, unforgiving and judgemental world. But those who have no awareness of their own fragility, who present themselves as overconfident, armoured-up and invulnerable, sacrifice the essence of what makes them both human and beautiful.
Vulnerability is the very thing that permits us to connect with each other, to recognise in others the same discomfort they have with themselves and with their place in the world. Vulnerability is the engine of compassion, and can be a superpower, a special vision that allows us to see the quivering, wounded inner world that most of us possess. [...]
With love, Nick"
(Nick Cave, The Red Hand Files, ISSUE #65 / OCTOBER 2019)

When Bircken undresses she leaves behind her rough leather motorcycle suit and her 2 ovaries

E3.1.1.a_REF6_PH  EGOTISM IS HEALTHY, ON THE CONDITION OF GETTING OUT OF IT.
“EGOTISM 
is not the cult of the self. For Stendhal, who popularized the word, it is rather its benevolent and lucid study, its analysis, its deepening, its perfection—not its cult, but its culture. A necessary and healthy moment, provided one gets out of it.”
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical dictionary, 2001)

E3.1.1.b. The Aesthetic Portal: Art, Poetry, and Vulnerability as Mechanisms of Release. How art does not just decorate life but forces an "epiphany" that ousts the ego.

E3.1.1.b_REF1_LIT  P_Alen Fayden ; P_Jamie Hall ; P_Marwell wildlife

"One thing is just the way in which beauty … does lead people I think to be concerned with justice. Beauty brings about what Iris Murdoch called “a nonselfing.” She said that when you suddenly see something beautiful — her example was suddenly seeing a bird lift off — it brings about a nonselfing. You can see beauty pressing us towards justice. There are certain attributes that beautiful things have. Some people would say symmetry. Any definition of justice always involves at its heart some idea of balance or symmetry. Even if you look back over lots of philosophers who are talking about forms of justice, they always have this idea, say, equal pay for equal work, that’s a symmetry. [...]
But sometimes people will say to me, well, first of all that they believe that it’s right, that the whole unselfing part is right, but they don’t believe in symmetry, and I really do believe in it because — and I think part of the reason why in this country we don’t like to talk anymore about symmetry in art or in justice is because we’re so asymmetrical, with so much money and so many weapons and, you know … if we had to start saying the heart of beauty is symmetry everybody would have to say, « gee, you know, we’ve got a big problem ».”
(Anna Deavere Smith and Sarah Lewis on beauty)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2018/07/17/oliver-sacks-beauty-deep-time/?mc_cid=0dbdbd1e47&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E3.1.1.b_REF2_PH A_Wenshu Manjusri Goddess ; A_Jesus with sword coming out of his mouth, from an altar in Hildesheim, Germany_circa1430

“For James Joyce, an epiphany is an aesthetic experience too great for the beholder to bear. It exceeds the boundaries of the normal—it has no practical application. It is an experience of the sublime that opens and expands the boundaries of your ego. These experiences can be of beauty but also of awe. Epiphanies go beyond ethical judgments—the sublime can be terrible. The terror is only felt if you are clinging to your ego. When you open up and embrace and affirm reality, there is no more good and bad or beauty and horror. The passing of time conceals an eternal principle of truth, which is reality in the present. The epiphany breaks the spell of time and gives us a realization of eternity. "We feel and experience that we are eternal" (Spinoza). Religions use the imagery of a god coming at you with a sword to break the ego and shake you into the realization of eternity (Jesus with a sword coming out of his mouth, the Wenshu Manjusri Goddess waving a sword over his head)—a means to open up our ego. The experience of eternity can't be expressed in language, only in poetry. Poetry, by its rhythm and choice of words, has the power to provoke epiphanies.”
(Interview with Joseph Campbell, The Power of Myth, Episode 6—Masks of Eternity—34'–43')

Watch the episode: 

E3.1.1.b_REF3_PO “THE ART OF POETRY
To gaze at a river made of time and water
and remember Time is another river.
To know we stray like a river
and our faces vanish like water.
To feel that waking is another dream
that dreams of not dreaming and that the death
we fear in our bones is the death
that every night we call a dream.
To see in every day and year a symbol
of all the days of man and his years,
and convert the outrage of the years
into a music, a sound, and a symbol.
To see in death a dream, in the sunset
a golden sadness such is poetry,
humble and immortal, poetry,
returning, like dawn and the sunset.
Sometimes at evening there's a face
that sees us from the deeps of a mirror.
Art must be that sort of mirror,
disclosing to each of us his face.
They say Ulysses, wearied of wonders,
wept with love on seeing Ithaca,
humble and green. Art is that Ithaca,
a green eternity, not wonders.
Art is endless like a river flowing,
passing, yet remaining, a mirror to the same
inconstant Heraclitus, who is the same
and yet another, like the river flowing.”
(Jorge Luis Borges)

“ARTE POÉTICA
Mirar el río hecho de tiempo y agua
y recordar que el tiempo es otro río,
saber que nos perdemos como el río
y que los rostros pasan como el agua.
Sentir que la vigilia es otro sueño
que sueña no soñar y que la muerte
que teme nuestra carne es esa muerte
de cada noche, que se llama sueño.
Ver en el día o en el año un símbolo
de los días del hombre y de sus años,
convertir el ultraje de los años
en una música, un rumor y un símbolo,
ver en la muerte el sueño, en el ocaso
un triste oro, tal es la poesía
que es inmortal y pobre. La poesía
vuelve como la aurora y el ocaso.
A veces en las tardes una cara
nos mira desde el fondo de un espejo;
el arte debe ser como ese espejo
que nos revela nuestra propia cara.
Cuentan que Ulises, harto de prodigios,
lloró de amor al divisar su Itaca
verde y humilde. El arte es esa Itaca
de verde eternidad, no de prodigios.
También es como el río interminable
que pasa y queda y es cristal de un mismo
Heráclito inconstante, que es el mismo
y es otro, como el río interminable.”
(Jorge Luis Borges)

E3.1.1.b_REF4_PO "MORNING BIRDS

I wake up the car
with its windshield sprinkled with frost.
I put on my sunglasses.
The birdsong grows dim. 

While another man buys a newspaper 
at the station kiosk 
not far from a large freight car 
entirely reddened by rust 
and glistening in the sun. 

No empty spaces anywhere here. 

Through the spring warmth, an icy corridor
Where someone comes striding 
to tell us that we are defaming him
even in the highest places.
 
Through a hidden door in the landscape
the magpie arrives
black and white. Bird of Hel.
And the blackbird flits here and there
until it blackens the entire drawing,
except for those white clothes on a clothesline:
a Palestrina choir.

No empty spaces anywhere here. 

How wonderful to feel my poem growing
as I shrink.
It grows, it takes my place.
It ousts me.
It throws me out of the nest.
The poem is finished."
(Tomas Tranströmer, Accords and Traces - Klanger och spår, 1966)

E3.1.1.b_REF5_PO A_Dani Calundy, Epic teen angst-ridden futuro grungy painting

"Self-knowledge might be the most difficult of life’s rewards — the hardest to earn and the hardest to bear. To know yourself is to know that you are not an unassailable fixity amid the entropic storm of the universe but a set of fragilities in constant flux. To know yourself is to know that you are not invulnerable.
The honest encounter with that vulnerability is the wellspring of art: Every artist’s art is their coping mechanism for the extreme sensitivity to aliveness that we call beauty — the transcendent and terrifying capacity to be moved by the world, to let something outside us stir deeply something within us. All great art — and only honest art can be great — is therefore the work of vulnerability and all integrity the function of fidelity to one’s fragilities."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings)
"You must be vulnerable to be sensitive to reality. And to me being vulnerable is just another way of saying that one has nothing more to lose. I don’t have anything but darkness to lose. I’m way beyond that."
(Bob Dylan)

E3.1.1.b_REF6_PO Martial, Raysse, To the end of the world

"Clear light
There are no more hours: there is life open as an expense. 
Where the self is foreign to me. 
Where my body has all the senses, all. 
Where I untie the visible and unconscious knots. 
It is the different way of my light moments within the material world. 
Nothing is closer to this, somehow, than a dragonfly. 
Or than this pear peel on the table which, inscribed in my brain,
Still points to the incredible presence of my flesh and bones."
(Christophe Béguin, Beauty's War, 2011)

"Lumière franche 
Il n’y a plus d’heures : il y a la vie ouverte comme dépense. 
Où le moi m’est étranger. 
Où mon corps a tous les sens, tous. 
Où je délie les nœuds visibles et inconscients. 
C’est la voie différente des instants légers que j’occupe dans la matière. 
Rien n’est plus proche de cela, au fond, qu’une libellule. 
Ou que cette pelure de poire sur la table qui, inscrite dans mon cerveau,
Désigne maintenant encore l’incroyable présence de ma chair et de mes os."
(Christophe Béguin, Guerre de beauté, 2011)

E3.1.1.b_REF7_PH A_Michelangelo Pistoletto_On the other side of the mirror, Performance_2018_La Biennale di Alessandria_(1) ; A_Michelangelo Pistoletto_On the other side of the mirror, Performance_2018_La Biennale di Alessandria_(2) ; A_Michelangelo Pistoletto_On the other side of the mirror, Performance_2018_La Biennale di Alessandria_(3) /Michelangelo Pistoletto/

"IN THE WEST, A MIRROR IS AN ESSENTIALLY NARCISSISTIC OBJECT : MAN THINKS OF A MIRROR ONLY TO LOOK AT HIMSELF ; but in the East, it seems, the mirror is empty ; it is a symbol of the very emptiness of symbols (« The mind of the perfect man, says a Tao master, is like a mirror. It grasps nothing but repels nothing. It receives, but does not preserve. »): the mirror only captures other mirrors, and this infinite reflection is emptiness itself (which, as we know, is the form). Thus the haiku makes us remember what never happened to us; in it we recognize a repetition without origin, an event without cause, a memory without a subject, a speech without moorings."
(Roland Barthes, The Empire of Signs, 1970)

E3.1.2. The Nature of the "Unselfed" State: Fusion, Presence, and the Paradox of Reality. The Romantic fusion (dissolving into the whole) and the Objective presence (becoming real through separation and attention).

E3.1.2.a. Ecstasy and "The Open": Dissolving into the Great Whole. Where boundaries vanish, and the subject merges with the landscape, experiencing the "Oceanic feeling."

E3.1.2.a_REF1_LIT A_Phil Greenwood_Buttercup Ridge ; A_Phil Greenwood_Blossom_2003 ; A_Phil Greenwood_Autumn Vines_2007 /Phil Greenwood/

OH! NEVER TO BE JUST SOMEWHERE! NEVER TO BE JUST SOMEONE...
"The image of spring is formed by the superimposition of many memories. [...]
Yes, it is from all these juxtaposed memories that I construct the abstract image of spring.
 And that is also what worries me when the first beautiful days arrive: I would like to be able to contemplate renewal everywhere at once, which means that I am never completely at ease anywhere, even in the most beautiful garden in the world, or even in my little garden in Cuverville when I knew every flower personally.
As soon as the air is warm enough and the sky is blue, I want to evaporate into the whole of nature, carried away by the passing breeze, floating without a fixed place, here and there. Oh! Never to be just somewhere! Never to be just someone...
Spring is a becoming; it is the season of preparation, of hope."
(André Gide, Spring, The Garland of Years, 1942)

E3.1.2.a_REF2_LIT "TO THE GREEKS, ECSTASY MEANT TO STAND OUTSIDE ONESELF. How is that possible? Through existential engineering. “Give me a place to stand,” Archimedes proclaimed in the third century B.C., “and I will move the earth.” Levered by ecstasy, one springs out of one’s mind. Thrown free of one’s normal self, a person stands in another place, on the limits of body, society, and reason, watching the known world dwindle in the distance (a spot standing far away)."
(Diane Akerman, Deep play)

E3.1.2.a_REF3_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN DESCRIBES ROUSSEAU'S BRIEF STAY ON SAINT-PIERRE ISLAND AS A RARE MOMENT OF TOTAL "COINCIDENCE" WITH NATURE AND THE SELF that granted access to a godlike, self-sufficient feeling of existence, which Jullien interprets as an "ecstasy" that expansively opens the subject to infinity.

"[Rousseau's stay] on Saint-Pierre Island was a brief coincidence following the stoning of Môtiers. He didn't unpack his trunks or settle in: It was as if he were staying in an inn from which he would have to leave the next day. Coincidence with the landscape, made possible by the 'circumscription' of an island; coincidence with society, made possible by a small group of people who entertain but do not monopolize; coincidence with nature, made possible by the study of botany; coincidence with oneself: "In this isolated stay, I embraced myself." This coincidence in all respects, undisturbed by any intrusion, provides access to a pure feeling of existence. As long as this state lasts, one is self-sufficient, like God.
But what does "exist" mean? Rousseau promotes it from within "feeling" itself, revealing its existential meaning for the first time by detaching it from "being" and connecting it to living. In this moment of coincidence, we can finally access it, enjoying "nothing outside ourselves" ("nothing but ourselves and our own existence"). Far from withdrawing into adequacy with himself, the subject experiences "ecstasy," says Rousseau ("my sweet ecstasies"). Ecstasy means "standing outside" in Greek, as expressed by ex-istere in Latin. In this sense, "ecstasy" is not mystical but rather expresses an ethical overflowing and stepping outside of oneself. Such a re-coincidence neither closes in on itself nor stabilizes. At the edge of the lake, in ephemeral harmony with the landscape, Rousseau expansively surrenders to the vagueness of what he calls "reverie." The subject finds itself by opening up to infinity. Otherwise, coincidence would be a forcing that may satisfy the mind but denies life."
(François Jullien, Dé-coïncidence, Where Art and Existence Come From, 2017).

E1.4.C.3.3_REF2_PH.wE3.1.2.a.

BACHELARD URGES US TO INVEST OURSELVES ACTIVELY IN DAYDREAMING, WHICH IS AN EXPERIENCE OF THE IMAGE, AND TO PLUNGE INTO A CONTEMPLATIVE STATE THAT DISSOLVES THE SUBJECT-OBJECT DISTINCTION. “For Bachelard, imagination is as vital as reason. He criticizes psychoanalysis for reducing dreams to mere obscure desires and passions. Instead, he grants dreams an autonomous reality, arguing that they possess their own logic—one that reason may not comprehend. Our attraction to certain images isn't arbitrary; these images are integral to the human spirit. Reason and daydreaming, in Bachelard's view, represent the pinnacle of human mental achievement, contrasting sharply with the mundane aspects of everyday life.
Bachelard distinguishes between nocturnal dreams—where the subject is suspended and obliterated—and daydreams, where the subject is present and engaged. "A poor daydream is one that invites you to take a nap,": true daydreaming is an active, image-rich experience that blurs the line between subject and object.
Consider the contemplation of still water. Bachelard ponders: when a man gazes at his reflection, is it truly man observing himself, or the world observing man? This illustrates how the dreamer becomes one with the world. For Bachelard, this non-separation of man and world in reverie is fundamental. The psychic division between subject and world is a later development, achieved through education and rational thinking. This explains why children excel at reverie.
Poetic imagery has the power to immerse us in reverie. Bachelard writes, "I need the reveries of others to remember that I too was a dreamer under candlelight" (Fire and Dreams). Daydreaming, then, becomes a means of reconnecting with others—a "communion of men." It's trans-subjective, transcending individual boundaries.
Daydreaming is a form of meditation centered on imagination rather than present-moment awareness. It suspends time and frees us from social and professional constraints. Bachelard argues passionately for its importance in work: "If you take away dreams, you'll knock out the worker. Neglect the dream-inspiring powers of work, and you diminish and annihilate the worker... The dream-inspiring capability of work is the very condition of the worker's mental integrity." He envisions a future where every trade has its dreamer, its dreaming guide, where factories have poetic offices. For Bachelard, will without the capacity to dream is mere brutality.
While projects represent the rationalized dimension of work, following predefined methods, true joy in work comes from the ability to dream—to visualize one's actions against resistant materials. This visualization stage, familiar to craftsmen, is crucial. Yet in today's professional culture, the idea of "dreaming well to work well" is seldom heard or valued.”
(Julien Lamy, in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture, on 05/21/2019)

E1.6.C.1.1.b_REF4.1_PH.wE3.1.2.a.

IN FRONT OF THE WATERS, NARCISSUS HAS THE REVELATION OF HIS IDENTITY AND HIS DUALITY, the revelation of his double masculine and feminine powers, the revelation especially of his reality and his ideality.
Near the fountain takes thus birth an idealizing narcissism [...]. The sublimation is not always the negation of a desire; it is not always presented as a sublimation against instincts. It can be a sublimation of an ideal. Then Narcissus does not say any more: « I like myself such as I am », he says: « I am such as I like myself ». I am with effervescence because I love myself with fervor. I want to appear, so I must increase my adornment. Thus life illustrates itself, life covers itself with images. Life grows; it transforms the being; life takes on whiteness; life blossoms; the imagination opens to the most distant metaphors; it participates in the life of all flowers. With this floral dynamic, real life takes on a new blassoming. Real life is better if given its fair leeway of unreality. [...]
  The least sigh 
  That I would exhale 
  Would come to confiscate 
  What I adored 
  On the blue and blond water 
  And skies and forests 
  And rose of the stream. 
   (« Narcissus », Paul Valéry, Combinations) 
[...] Narcissus at the fountain is not only deep into the contemplation of himself. His own image is the center of a world. With Narcissus, for Narcissus, it is all the forest which is reflected, all the sky which comes to take conscience of its grandiose image. [...] A cosmic narcissism [...] thus gives continuum quite naturally to the egoistic one. « I am handsome because nature is beautiful, nature is beautiful because I am handsome». Such is the endless dialogue of creative imagination and its natural models."
(Gaston Bachelard, Water and Dreams, 1942)


E3.1.2.a_REF4_LIT THIS IS THE CONTACT WITH THE "SUPREME UNIVERSAL STRANGENESS" AND THE "ESSENTIAL" REALITY BEHIND APPEARANCES.
"It felt as if everything was draining away. I didn't feel it as a void that had eaten away at my being and trapped me inside it. I was now nothing more than a frame around the void until I was completely consumed by it. It wasn't the emptiness we usually feel. That heavy emptiness, if I can put it that way. This time, it was a liberation. Things were losing their weight around me. I was separating myself from things that were losing their arbitrary and conventional meanings. This enormous quantity of contradictory and intertwined meanings had caught me or had been a multitude of confused paths—a labyrinth in which I was lost. Everything was now permeated by a dazzling light. I realized with boundless joy that everything is. I could think of nothing else but that everything is—that all things are—and realizing that they were, all things were, but differently, in a light of grace—delicate and fragile.
To me, fragility seemed to be one of the qualities of appearance or manifestation. However, this fragility was not disturbing. Quite the contrary. A great luminous energy seemed to be constantly on the verge of disarticulating and dissolving things. This light and force seemed hidden under the mask of things, but now it burst forth and exploded. It was a unique light, and things were the particular events of this light—the event-objects in which it was particularized. Truthfully, it had only been on the verge of exploding and dissolving everything, but the fire did not spread. Things had become luminous and translucent, but their contours were merely on the verge of fading and disappearing. There was no ecstasy or union. It was as if I had arrived at a frontier, on the edge of history, yet still here. Why did this invasion of light stop? Why wasn't I engulfed by the universal fire? Who or what within me was able to stop it? What accident or mistake prevented it? It was as if the luminous energy had collided with an invisible obstacle—lighter than a cloud—like smoke that covered and blackened everything. In an instant, things became heavy, opaque, and dark again. From that moment on, I understood that things are beautiful insofar as they retain a little of that light. I felt myself becoming heavy, thick, and leaden again—a leaden thing that the void can gnaw at, turning you into something to eat.
It seems to me that I was at the frontier of existence, very close to the place where things lose their name and definition, where time stops and history ends.”
(Eugène Ionesco, Diary in Pieces)

E3.1.2.a_REF4.1_LIT THIS IS THE CONTACT WITH THE "SUPREME UNIVERSAL STRANGENESS" AND THE "ESSENTIAL" REALITY BEHIND APPEARANCE (Continued)
"I had the experience. I knew what it was like to be outside of history. It is possible to achieve this state. This initial state of astonishment and amazement is unique to the human condition. It can enlighten anyone, regardless of their social status, historical era, or economic circumstances. None of these factors play a role in this case; none contribute to the emergence or disappearance of this experience. It happened, and so it happens in this kind of no man's land on the margins of the absolute or nothingness. Anyone—in the 20th century, the 15th century, or any other century; a biblical farmer or a modern petty bourgeois—can experience this once or twice. They can be filled with this luminous, irresistible astonishment and have the ahistorical, fundamentally asocial feeling of supreme, universal strangeness. I wonder if this unusual feeling—this astonishment without answer and almost without question—is a reaction of my deepest consciousness. Truthfully, I am not asking. I know it is this amazement that constitutes my most authentic consciousness. I know full well that the answer is the very impossibility of giving one. The non-answer is the best answer. [...]
In the past, when I was a teenager and for a little while after, astonishment gave rise to euphoria. Once again, I try to describe this state of mind, this event. I was in a small provincial town. I must have been about eighteen years old. It was a bright day, just before noon. It was early June. I was walking in front of the small town's low, white houses. What happened next was completely unexpected. The town underwent a sudden transformation. Everything became deeply real and deeply unreal. Reality and unreality were closely and indissolubly intertwined. The houses became whiter and cleaner. They appeared completely new and virginal in the light—an unknown world that I felt I had known forever. It was a world that the light dissolved and then reconstituted. A warm, luminous, overflowing joy welled up from deep within me. It was an absolute presence. I told myself that this was "truth," though I didn't know how to define it. Without a doubt, if I had tried to define it, it would have vanished. I told myself that since I had experienced this event and knew everything, I would never be unhappy again. I had learned that we do not die; I only had to remember these moments to overcome any future worries and anxieties. I had a revelation about what was essential; everything else was inessential.”
(Eugène Ionesco, Diary in Pieces)

E3.1.2.a_REF5_PH "OCEANIC FEELING
An expression borrowed by Freud from his "revered friend" Romain Rolland to describe certain spiritual or mystical states. It is 'a feeling of indissoluble union with the great Whole, and of belonging to the universal,' much like a wave or a drop of water are united with the ocean that carries them, or like falling out of the world. It is also a sense of unity, as Freud described in his reading: 'a sense of eternity, of something boundless, without limits,' a mixture of serenity and falling out of the world, and being one with the Whole. This experience is well-documented in all civilizations and often independently of religion (see Michel Hulin, La mystique sauvage, Puf, 1993; reprinted in 2008). Freud does not dispute its reality but refuses to see it as the origin of religions (Civilization and Its Discontents, I). He is undoubtedly right. Religions presuppose separation (between the sacred and the profane, and between God and the world) rather than unity. This is why they are generally wary of mystics and the oceanic feeling in particular: "When I am one with everything, what need do I have for a church?" "When I am one with everything, what need do I have for a church?"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical dictionary, 2001)

E3.1.2.a_REF6_PH “OPEN 
[...] For Rilke, [...] it is the 'indescribable openness' of nature. This occurs when we cease to treat nature as an external, opaque object and instead inhabit its internal, shared, open-ended space. 'Through all beings passes the single space, the inner space of the world. Silently, the birds fly through us. [...]  All eyes of all living things look toward the Open." This is another way of describing the present, but it is thought of as space rather than duration ("the pure and simple space in which flowers never cease to bloom"), as coexistence rather than succession. Thus, humans and animals are open in the Open, passing through the passage and sharing the same fleeting eternity at the heart of being, infinity, and mystery. Animals live it without knowing it, and, as Rilke observes, most humans know it without living it or hasten to forget it."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E3.1.2.b. The Paradox of Presence: "I am the size of what I see."
True unselfing is not just disappearing, but achieving a higher reality through objective attention, conatus (perseverance), and recognizing the "strangeness" of the other.

E3.1.2.b_REF1_PH JACQUES DARRIULAT CONTRASTS ROUSSEAU'S ROMANTIC ECSTASY, FOUND IN THE INTOXICATED DISSOLUTION OF THE SELF INTO THE VASTNESS OF NATURE, with Spinoza's concept of conatus, which defines existence not as a loss of self but as the active, divine power to stubbornly maintain one's individual identity and cohesion against the forces of dissolution.
"By communing with the soul of the world, the individual loses himself ecstatically in immensity. This is the feeling of the sublime that Kant described as the feeling of the absolutely great and the intuition of the infinite on which Schleiermacher based his new theology. However, according to Rousseau, such an experience is inspired by reverie, not by the experience of eternity, as Spinoza would have it. The ecstasy of the solitary walker arises from the dissolution of the self, which loses itself in the Whole. The more sensitive the soul of the contemplator, the more he surrenders to the ecstasy aroused in him by this harmony, the 'harmony of the three kingdoms' of nature. A sweet and profound reverie then takes hold of his senses, and he loses himself in delicious intoxication in the immensity of this beautiful system with which he identifies. All particular objects escape him; he sees and feels nothing but the whole. I never meditate or dream more deliciously than when I forget myself. I feel ecstasy and inexpressible rapture at melting into the system of beings and identifying myself with the whole of nature" (Seventh Promenade). There is nothing like this in Spinoza. The conatus, or the desire to assert one's own existence, is the essence of being—that is, divine power expressed by the vital force that animates each individual. "Everything, insofar as it is in itself, strives to persevere in its being" (Eth. III, 6). This is not a matter of losing one's individuality through communion with the soul of the greater whole. Rather, it is a matter of affirming the power to act that gives the individual its cohesion, coherence, and identity. Every particular existence thus affirms the unity that maintains its existence and has no desire to dissolve into an undifferentiated immensity. "For what we have shown so far applies equally to humans and other individuals, all of whom are animated, albeit to varying degrees" (Scholia II, 13). Everything, including stones, owes its cohesion to a divine force that maintains its unity and affirms its existence against the various pressures exerted on it by surrounding things. These pressures cause it to suffer a thousand passions in a full world where all bodies interact with one another. The stone is unaware of this, but man can grasp the principle and law of its cohesion and understand its necessity. Like stone, man is only a part of nature. Every part is a temporary aggregation of corpuscles that form a system for the duration assigned to this necessarily fragile organism. It is perpetually attacked by external bodies and regenerated by the renewal of its cells—the micro-formations that infinitely compose it. The density of the Absolute is realized in both matter and thought. Without conatus—the power to persevere in existence—the individual would immediately lose his identity and the organization that gives him substance would dissolve into disorganized, undifferentiated matter. Conatus is therefore an immanent cause of the identity of the individual, destined to assert and renew itself during the duration of its existence according to the resistance it is able to oppose to the forces that are contrary to it, in extension through the existence of the body and in thought through the chain of adequate ideas."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of This World: A Society of Reason, 2017)


E1.7.C.2.3_REF1_PH.wE3.1.2.b.

"FICHTE: "FORGETTING ONESELF IS THE CRITERION OF REALITY."
How do we avoid a formidable pitfall that threatens philosophy: to forget that man is first of all a being in relation, that is to say in relation with the world, things, other men? It is with this in mind that Fichte writes this dialogue with himself: "as you read this book, when you contemplate this object, when you speak with your friend, do you think about what you are doing, what you are reading, what you contemplate, what you hear or see? Not at all! I do not think of myself, I completely forget myself in the book, in the object, in the conversation - the formulation is correct when we say that we are absorbed in what we do or we are immersed in it". Fichte's remarks are decisive: the criterion for checking that you are in relation to reality is that you have gone to the background.
Thsi explains my astonishment with the school of meditation we call in France "full consciousness". Mindful walking, mindful eating - in a strict sense, is torture and a confinement. I am all the more surprised that the experience of meditation that I discovered about thirty years ago precisely taught me to free myself from full consciousness; my consciousness goes to the background: it is the world, it is things, beings which suddenly appear more fully and it is this movement which makes one happy - to forget oneself. We've all experienced it, there are times when you don't really know why or how, things just happen on their own, you just feel like you're serving the situation"
(Fabrice Midal, 3 minutes of philosophy to become human again, broadcast on France Culture on 08/19/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: Écouter le podcast: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/3-minutes-de-philosophie-pour-redevenir-humain/fichte-loubli-de-soi-est-le-critere-du-reel

E1.7.B.2.4.a_REF1_PO.wE3.1.2.b.

E3.1.2.b_REF2_LIT FOR SEGALEN, TRUE AWARENESS (UNSELFING) ARISES ONLY WHEN MAN CONCEIVES NATURE AS "DIFFERENT FROM HIM. He defines the sublime experience of nature not as super-human, but as "ex-human"—blind, eternal, and giant - the "greater whole" that exists completely independently of human ego or morality.
"The Exoticism of Nature"

This is our first experience with exoticism. The outside world immediately sets us apart. We will flee from old disputes about the reality of things. Oh, what does it matter if they move us? Nature only became a concept when humans learned to conceive of it as separate from themselves.

For a long time, he animated it with his own breath. He lent it his passions and gestures. Can we say that the Vedas felt nature? No! They animated it according to their desires. We know how much the Greeks ignored nature, and it is said that savages largely do the same. The sense of nature that is not anthropomorphized—of nature that is blind, eternal, gigantic, and not superhuman, but ex-human—and from which springs the strange—all of humanity—this exotic sense of nature only appeared with the knowledge of its forces and laws. These forces and laws were so distant from human ones that distraught man ran to the other end of the world and recognized two worlds: the physical and the moral. [...]

Regarding my plan of the universe being absorbed by a seed idea that swells... The wise man... discerns that he almost took a particular taste for a principle of certainty, and that he considered his will to be the center of the world for a moment. He lucidly perceives the passionate origin of the theory that upset him. In this way, he knows its relativity. He knows the precise place where it breaks the chain of causality to take hold of the will... "

(For me, it is an aptitude of my sensitivity—the ability to perceive diversity—which I consider the aesthetic foundation of my understanding of the world. I know where it comes from: myself. I know it's no more true than anything else, but also that it's no less true. I believe that I was the one who had to bring it to light, and that I will have fulfilled my role by doing so. "See the world, and then express your vision of it." I saw the world in all its diversity. I wanted to convey the flavor of this diversity.)"
(Victor Segalen, Essay on Exoticism, an Aesthetic of Diversity, 1908)

E3.1.2.b_REF2.1_LIT SEGALEN ARGUES THAT WE ONLY TRULY "TASTE" NATURE WHEN WE ARE "SEPARATED, DIFFERENTIATED" FROM IT. This challenges the "oceanic feeling" of Freud or the "fusion" of Rousseau (whom he explicitly criticizes). He redefines "Unselfing" not as becoming the object, but as recognizing the object as Other. 

"En somme, c'est l'éternel essai sur « le sentiment de la Nature » que je reprends ainsi. Sa banalité même va être la pierre de touche où se raiera, ou non, où se marquera, ou non, la pureté, la nouveauté de ma vision. Si elle éclaire ces fouillis fades où se répandirent les Rousseau, les George Sand, et d'autres, c'est qu'elle a vraiment quelque vertu singulière. Il ne me déplaît pas de l'exercer sur d'aussi piètres sujets.
Mais si de tout cela il ne sort rien d'imprévu... qu'on ferme le livre. C'est que le sens du Divers ne me possède pas... ou bien qu'on n'aura pas su l'accueillir.

Il existe une curieuse opposition entre le sentiment de la Nature et la Vie dans la Nature. On ne voit, on ne sent, on ne déguste la nature avec une grande joie esthétique, que lorsqu'on s'en est un peu séparé, différencié. Ceci prend une valeur singulière si je remplace, comme le veut le jeu de ma pensée, le mot sentiment par le mot Exotisme: Exotisme de la Nature : ne peut exister que si on la sent différente de soi. [...]

Maurice de Guérin est un bel exemple, pour l'Exotisme de la Nature, de ce que j'ai dessein de faire pour l'Exotisme des Races et des Moeurs m'en imbiber d'abord, puis m'en extraire, afin de les laisser dans toute leur saveur objective (comme les mêmes mots se retrouvent obstinément avec leur même force! Je dois aboutir à l'exotisme essentiel : celui de l'Objet pour le sujet !). Ainsi Maurice de Guérin s'est d'abord pénétré de la Nature, puis il s'en est totalement retiré. Cependant que ses contemporains romantiques, « n'ont fait de la nature que le corollaire de leur moi, et n'en ont rendu que des aspects particuliers ». [...]
(Je suis obligé de copier ce qui suit! En somme, cet essai de Clouard me vole et me comble à la fois : en me donnant un admirable exemple d'Exotisme de la Nature, et en le traitant d'une sorte telle qu'il me faudra tout faire pour la surpasser. En tout cas la reprendre fortement du point de vue exotique.)
« Voilà son (Maurice de Guérin) grand trait original : l'objectivité. Or cette objectivité accroît toute émotion de ce qu'elle y met de ferme, de solide, d'éternel... Maurice de Guérin a seulement allié (je disais le compromis de la Vie, avec Jules de Gaultier et je pensais que ma formule d'esthétique n'était ni plus vraie, ni moins vraie qu'une autre) le sentiment profond de l'Unité universelle au sentiment des différences des choses. [...] »
Il se peut qu'un des caractères de l'Exote soit la liberté, soit d'être libre vis-à-vis de l'objet qu'il décrit ou ressent, du moins dans cette phase finale, quand il s'en est retiré. Au contraire, les Loti sont mystiquement ivres et inconscients de leur objet, qu'ils mélangent à eux, et auquel ils se mélangent éperdument, « ivre de dieu! ». Or, Clouard dit : « La seule force de ces beautés montrera, je pense, qu'elles n'eussent pu naître sans une entière liberté de l'auteur à l'égard de son objet ni sans une incomparable fermeté de l'esprit : il faut sentir ce qu'une telle originalité a de réfléchi et de voulu jusque dans le plus fort de l'exaltation. » [...]
En somme, c'est l'éternel essai sur « le sentiment de la Nature » que je reprends ainsi. Sa banalité même va être la pierre de touche où se raiera, ou non, où se marquera, ou non, la pureté, la nouveauté de ma vision. Si elle éclaire ces fouillis fades où se répandirent les Rousseau, les George Sand, et d'autres, c'est qu'elle a vraiment quelque vertu singulière. Il ne me déplaît pas de l'exercer sur d'aussi piètres sujets.
Mais si de tout cela il ne sort rien d'imprévu... qu'on ferme le livre. C'est que le sens du Divers ne me possède pas... ou bien qu'on n'aura pas su l'accueillir.

Il existe une curieuse opposition entre le sentiment de la Nature et la Vie dans la Nature. On ne voit, on ne sent, on ne déguste la nature avec une grande joie esthétique, que lorsqu'on s'en est un peu séparé, différencié. Ceci prend une valeur singulière si je remplace, comme le veut le jeu de ma pensée, le mot sentiment par le mot Exotisme: Exotisme de la Nature : ne peut exister que si on la sent différente de soi. [...]

Maurice de Guérin est un bel exemple, pour l'Exotisme de la Nature, de ce que j'ai dessein de faire pour l'Exotisme des Races et des Moeurs m'en imbiber d'abord, puis m'en extraire, afin de les laisser dans toute leur saveur objective (comme les mêmes mots se retrouvent obstinément avec leur même force! Je dois aboutir à l'exotisme essentiel : celui de l'Objet pour le sujet !). Ainsi Maurice de Guérin s'est d'abord pénétré de la Nature, puis il s'en est totalement retiré. Cependant que ses contemporains romantiques, « n'ont fait de la nature que le corollaire de leur moi, et n'en ont rendu que des aspects particuliers ». [...]
(Je suis obligé de copier ce qui suit! En somme, cet essai de Clouard me vole et me comble à la fois : en me donnant un admirable exemple d'Exotisme de la Nature, et en le traitant d'une sorte telle qu'il me faudra tout faire pour la surpasser. En tout cas la reprendre fortement du point de vue exotique.)
« Voilà son (Maurice de Guérin) grand trait original : l'objectivité. Or cette objectivité accroît toute émotion de ce qu'elle y met de ferme, de solide, d'éternel... Maurice de Guérin a seulement allié (je disais le compromis de la Vie, avec Jules de Gaultier et je pensais que ma formule d'esthétique n'était ni plus vraie, ni moins vraie qu'une autre) le sentiment profond de l'Unité universelle au sentiment des différences des choses. [...] »
Il se peut qu'un des caractères de l'Exote soit la liberté, soit d'être libre vis-à-vis de l'objet qu'il décrit ou ressent, du moins dans cette phase finale, quand il s'en est retiré. Au contraire, les Loti sont mystiquement ivres et inconscients de leur objet, qu'ils mélangent à eux, et auquel ils se mélangent éperdument, « ivre de dieu! ». Or, Clouard dit : « La seule force de ces beautés montrera, je pense, qu'elles n'eussent pu naître sans une entière liberté de l'auteur à l'égard de son objet ni sans une incomparable fermeté de l'esprit : il faut sentir ce qu'une telle originalité a de réfléchi et de voulu jusque dans le plus fort de l'exaltation. » [...]"
(Victor Segalen, Essay on Exoticism, an Aesthetic of Diversity, 1908)


E3.1.2.b_REF3_LIT."THERE ARE MOMENTS WHEN EVERY DETAIL OF THE ORDINARY INTERESTS ME IN ITS OWN RIGHT, and I have an affection for everything because I can read everything clearly. Then I see—as Vieira said Sousa described—the common with singularity, and I am a poet with that soul with which Greek criticism formed the intellectual age of poetry. But there are also moments, and this is one that oppresses me now, when I feel more myself than external things, and everything turns into a night of rain and mud, lost in the solitude of a sidings, between two third-class trains.
Yes, my intimate virtue of often being objective, and thus straying from thinking about myself, suffers, like all virtues, and even like all vices, from a decline in affirmation."
(Fernando Pessoa, The Book of Disquiet, 1914)

E3.1.2.b_REF4_PH “We must try to penetrate the secret order of things and take nature as our model. It is a model of grandeur, of emptiness, and a generator of the absolute. It is only by following its path that we can approach being. As an eighth-century painter said: “Outside, I took nature as my teacher and found the nature of my heart.” 
(Words of Master Huang, reported by Fabienne Verdier, A Passenger of Silence)

E3.1.2.b_REF5_LIT I AM THE SIZE F WHAT I SEE.
"I reread passively, receiving inspiration and deliverance from those simple phrases by Caeiro about the small size of his village. He says that because the village is small, you can see more of the world than from the city, and that is why the village is bigger than the city.
 

'Because I am the size of what I see, and not the size of my height.'" 

Phrases like these seem to grow without my intention, cleansing me of the metaphysics I add to life spontaneously. After reading them, I go to my window overlooking the narrow street. I look at the big sky and the many stars, and I feel free, as if I have wings, and this feeling shakes my whole body. 
"I am the size of what I see!" Each time I contemplate this phrase, it seems more destined to reconstruct the universe into a constellation. "I am the size of what I see!" What great mental possession travels from the depths of emotion to the stars reflected in it! Thus, in a way, the stars are there. 
Now, knowing how to see, I look at the vast metaphysics of the heavens with certainty, wanting to die singing. "I am the size of what I see!" The vague moonlight, entirely mine, begins to spoil the midnight blue horizon. 
I want to raise my arms and shout savage things, speak to lofty mysteries, and affirm a broad new personality to the vast empty spaces.
 
But I collect myself and slow down. "I am the size of what I see!" The phrase encompasses my entire soul. I lean on it, and all my emotions fall upon me, inside, as upon the city outside. The hard moonlight, which begins at dusk, falls upon us all, indecipherable."
(Fernando Pessoa, The Book of Disquiet, 1914)

E3.1.2.b_REF6_PO “ON LOOKING

what I see
passes through me
like air
the bird

what I see goes
through me
almost stays
behind me

what I see
— the mountain, for example
bathed in sunlight —
occupies me
and I am then only
that rough illuminated rock
or almost
if it weren't
for knowing that I see it.”
(Ferreira Gullar, Noises, 1980-1987)



“OLHAR

o que eu vejo
me atravessa
  como ao ar
  a ave

o que eu vejo passa
através de mim
quase fica
  atrás de mim

o que eu vejo
— a montanha por exemplo
banhada de sol —
  me ocupa
e sou então apenas
essa rude pedra iluminada
ou quase
se não fora
  saber que a vejo.”
(Ferreira Gullar, Barulhos, 1980-1987)

E3.1.2.b_REF7_LIT "KNOWING ANOTHER IS ENDLESS. AND I HAVE DISCOVERED THAT MAN’S EXPERIENCE OF THEM ENLARGES ROCK, FLOWER AND BIRD. The thing to be known grows with the knowing. I believe that I now understand in some small measure why the Buddhist goes on pilgrimage to a mountain. The journey is itself part of the technique by which the god is sought. It is a journey into Being; for as I penetrate more deeply into the mountain’s life, I penetrate also into my own. For an hour I am beyond desire. It is not ecstasy, that leap out of the self that makes man like a god. I am not out of myself, but in myself. I am. To know Being, this is the final grace accorded from the mountain."
(Nan Shepherd, The Living Mountain)

E1.7.C.3.1.a_REF1_PH.wE3.1.2.b.

"VI. THE MARVELOUS MOMENT

YOU ARE LISTENING TO A SONG. SUDDENLY I ASK, "At this moment, who are you?" How will you answer this question immediately and spontaneously, without stopping to find words? If the question does not shock you out of listening, you will answer by humming the song. If the question surprised you, you will answer, "At this moment, who are you?" But if you stop to think, you will try to tell me, not about this moment, but about the past. I shall get information about your name and address, your business and personal history. But I asked who you are, not who you were. [...]

In times of happiness and pleasure, we are usually ready enough to be aware of the moment, and to the experience be all. In such moments we "forget ourselves," and the mind makes no attempt to divide itself from itself, to be separate from experience. But with the arrival of pain, whether physical or emotional, whether actual or anticipated, the split begins and the circle goes round and round.

As soon as it becomes clear that "I" cannot possibly escape from the reality of the present, since "I" is nothing other than what I know now, this inner turmoil must stop. No possibility remains but to be aware of pain, fear, boredom, or grief in the same complete way that one is aware of pleasure. The human organism has the most wonderful powers of adaptation to both physical and psychological pain. But these can only come into full play when the pain is not being constantly restimulated by this inner effort to get away from it, to separate the "I" from the feeling. The effort creates a state of tension in which the pain thrives. But when the tension ceases, mind and body begin to absorb the pain as water reacts to a blow or cut. [...]

We cannot compare joy with sorrow. Comparison is possible only by the very rapid alternation of two states of mind, and you cannot switch back and forth between the genuine feelings of joy and sorrow as you can shift your eyes between a cat and a dog. Sorrow can only be compared with the memory of joy, which is not at all the same thing as joy itself. [...]"
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

E3.2. The Unconscious and the "Other" Within. Becoming self-aware means confronting the parts of us that are not our conscious mind.

E3.2.1. The Illusion of Mastery and the Terror of the "Stranger" Within. The conscious mind's realization that it is being steered by unknown forces, the anxiety of not knowing the source of one's emotions, and the philosophical view that the true source of tragedy and repression is internal, not external.

E3.2.1_REF1_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE THE POST-DISTRACTION EFFORT TO RECALL THE REASON WHY YOU'RE FEELING PARTICULARLY ANXIOUS OR ANGRY OR EXCITED
“nementia n. the post-distraction effort to recall the reason why you're feeling particularly anxious or angry or excited, in which you retrace your sequence of thoughts like a kid wandering across the neighborhood gathering the string of a downed kite, which was likely lost in a romantic storm or devoured by that huge carnivorous tree that is Things Your Parents Have Said.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E3.2.1_REF2_PO “WHERE’S MY LIFE GOING, AND WHO’S TAKING IT THERE?
Why do I always do what I didn’t want to do? 
What destiny in me keeps on marching in the darkness?
What part of me that I don’t know is my guide? 
My destiny has a direction and a method, 
My life adheres to a path and a scale, 
But my self-awareness is the sketchy outline 
Of what I do and am; it isn’t me. 
I don’t even know myself in what I knowingly do. 
I never reach the end of what I do with an end in mind. 
The pleasure or pain I embrace isn’t what it really is. 
I move on, but there’s no I inside me that moves. 
Who am I, Lord, in your darkness and your smoke? 
What soul besides mine inhabits my soul? 
Why did you give me the feeling of a path 
If the path I seek I’m not seeking, if in me nothing walks 
Except through an effort in my steps that’s not mine, 
Except by a fate hidden from me in my acts? 
Why am I conscious if consciousness is an illusion? 
What am I between “what” and the facts? 
Close my eyes, obscure my soul’s vision! 
O illusions! Since I know nothing about myself or life,
May I enjoy at least that nothing, without faith 
     but calmly, 
May I at least sleep through living, like a forgotten
     beach...”
(Fernando Pessoa, 5 June 1917)

E3.2.1_REF3_PO "The words that spring to mind know things about us that we ourselves are unaware of. For a moment, we will be the crew of this fleet made up of
unruly units, and for the duration of a squall, its admiral. Then the open sea will reclaim it, leaving us to our muddy torrents and frosty barbed wire."
(René Char, The Vine Leaf, Songs of Balandrane, 1977)

"Les mots qui vont surgir savent de nous ce que nous ignorons d’eux. Un moment nous serons l’équipage de cette flotte composée
d’unités rétives et le temps d’un grain, son amiral. Puis le large le reprendra, nous laissant à nos torrents limoneux et à nos barbelés givrés"
(René Char, La feuille vineuse, Chants de la Balandrane, 1977)

E3.2.1_REF4_PH A_León Ferrari_Sem título [public and private self]_1985-1986

CLÉMENT ROSSET ARGUES THAT THE "ANTI-TRAGIC" AND PARANOID TENDENCY TO ATTRIBUTE MISFORTUNE TO EXTERNAL FORCES OBSCURES THE TRUE NATURE OF TRAGEDY, which locates the ultimate source of terror and the unknown not in an alien "elsewhere," but within the disturbing interiority of the self.
"In general, the concept of exteriority is arguably the anti-tragic theme par excellence because it is the core theme of paranoia ("they" have condemned me to perdition).  [...]. Its exteriority ensures that a being can only be accidentally affected by tragedy. It is either a scattered halo around the sphere of the rational world (the idea of irrationality) or a fatal power that disrupts human determinism. Without this external interference, determinism would be healthy, normal, and harmonious (the idea of destiny). In any case, it is something that is not primary but intervenes and disrupts: otherness, the enemy. This elementary fantasy, from Rousseau to the present day, has sustained everything conceived as mediocre or crazy in philosophy. Paranoid figures, such as blaming others or God, are just variations on the original theme of attributing the tragic nature of existence to an "elsewhere." "Elsewhere" sums up the misunderstanding of tragedy and the origin of the idea of "misfortune." The two themes, misfortune and tragedy, are inextricably linked by exclusivity: if there is tragedy, there is no misfortune. [...]
While the concept of exteriority refers to the non-tragic, the concept of interiority refers to the specific realm of tragedy, as well as the connections between Greek tragedy and modern psychoanalytic perspectives. Both Sophocles and Freud reject the idea of an external force oppressing man and instead locate the source of terror within oneself. They both discover a force within man sufficient to describe the totality of his misfortunes, at least his "psychological" misfortunes. Nothing is more tragic or terrifying for humans than that which comes from within themselves. Nothing is stranger or more unknown. Here, in this primal terror of the self, lies the source of what Freud described as "repression." The idea that the closest is also the farthest away, the best known is the most unknown, and the most familiar is the most strange is a theme that fuels Greek tragedy, detective stories, and psychoanalytic thought. What is the unknown X sought by the tragic hero, the police inspector, and the psychoanalyst? Tragedy says it is yourself; the detective novel says it is the number one innocent, described from the outset as a character too familiar to be suspected; and psychoanalysis says it is the unknown force within you that represses you. (Clément Rosset, The Logic of the Worse, 1971).

E3.2.1_REF4.1_LIT A_Salvador Dali_Sketches of Freud_1938 

CLÉMENT ROSSET DRAWS ON FREUD’S CONCEPT OF THE UNHEIMLICHE AND THE FIGURE OF OEDIPUS TO ARGUE THAT THE ULTIMATE SOURCE OF ANXIETY IS NOT THE SPECIFIC CONTENT OF WHAT IS REPRESSED, BUT THE TERRIFYING DISCOVERY THAT THE MECHANISM OF REPRESSION ITSELF IS AN UNCONTROLLABLE, alien force operating within our deepest intimacy. 
"In his 1919 study, Das Unheimliche, Freud equated the strange with the familiar, an idea expressed by the ambiguous notion of heimlich. This concept sums up the mechanism of terror. Seeing the present, the close, and the familiar as absent, distant, and strange is the tragic experience par excellence—but only after it is too late. Yet, of everything close to humans, nothing is closer than themselves and the psychological forces at work within them. Psychological powers are so familiar yet so distant from any real knowledge that Freud called them the unconscious. The possibility of relegation to the unconscious takes place in silence and is both the most familiar and the most unknown, thus defining one of the most characteristic "points" of anxiety. This idea is further explained in Freud's essay "Inhibition, Symptom, and Anxiety," which poses a fundamental question: Does the anxiety-provoking content of certain themes lead people to repress them, or does the mechanism of repression itself cause anxiety? If we opt for the second hypothesis, anxiety is not defined by a particular object but by how that object was excluded from consciousness. This is distressing because it is man's most intimate work and yet it escapes his control. What is most "his" is also most foreign to him. Psychoanalysis asks the neurotic, "What are you afraid of?" In other words, everyone. No, perhaps not of what is terrible about what you have forgotten, but rather of the fact that you forgot it without realizing it. You are afraid of yourself, of this person who is unknown to you and who controls the mechanism within you that allows you to admit or exclude this or that representation from your consciousness—whichever it may be, ultimately. If you wake up in anguish, trying in vain to remember the frightening dream, it's not the fear of reliving it that frightens you. Rather, it's the fear of coming face-to-face with the unknown force within you that causes you to forget your dream at that very moment. What represses you is much more frightening than what you repress. This is what Freud taught and what Greek tragedy taught as well, notably in Oedipus Rex. Oedipus is both a psychoanalytic and tragic hero not because he is incestuous and a parricide, but because he questions something exterior to the subject that concerns only interiority."
(Clément Rosset, Logic of the Worse, 1971)

E3.2.2. The Constitutive Other: How Passion, Instinct, and the "Self" Create the Subject. The "Other" is not just a saboteur, but the very foundation of the subject. 
How the body, passions, and the "Self" construct the "I," and how one can actively engage with this otherness for healing or creativity.

E3.2.2_REF1_PH CARL GUSTAV JUNG POSITED THAT THE PSYCHE POSSESSES AN INHERENT SPIRITUAL HEALING PROCESS WHERE THE TRANSCENDENT "SELF" GUIDES THE "EGO" TOWARD UNITY.
"Carl Gustav Jung was a mystical dissident from Freud.
In 1913, Jung, a disciple of Freud, broke with his mentor. Jung believed that dreams were an essential vehicle of psychoanalysis with healing properties, whereas Freud believed that dreams merely expressed neuroses. Jung and Freud had opposing approaches to dreams. For Freud, dreams must always be reduced to reveal the symptoms of a neurosis. For Jung, however, dreams contain the cure for neurosis. From dream to dream, there is a healing process that comes from within the psyche itself. For Jung, analysis is essentially the interpretation of dreams and this process"
(Pierre Trigano).

According to Jung, dreams do not belong to the dreamer. Rather, they are the expression of an otherness that comes from deep within. We do not create dreams; we receive them from the "Self" when the "Ego" is asleep. The Self is the transcendent center of the psyche. For Jung, psychoanalysis is always a spiritual experience, unlike for Freud. The Self flows through all of us; it is a secular, mystical vision. The Self guides the ego toward unity. Problems cannot be solved, but they can be overcome by integrating opposites and allowing things to happen (influenced by Taoism). This does not mean the cancellation of the Ego because we need to be differentiated beings. The ego is essential for experiencing the outside world and the inner process of the Self.
The Self can reunite opposites and reduce intrapsychic conflicts imposed by the ego, which defends a one-sided point of view steeped in the unconscious.

Freud believed that dreams were merely a symptom of neurosis, so he retained only certain dream symbols, while Jung studied dreams in their entirety as a process and took the time to interpret their symbolic meanings.
"If there was one faculty neglected by philosophers, it was imagination. However, one need only consider humanity to sense the singular dynamism of the human imagination. Images that superficial psychology considers fleeting and contingent appear to be deeply rooted in the human psyche. Images have a hierarchy, and Jung endeavored to elucidate this hierarchy to find the fundamental images—those that are alive in all centuries and in all people of different races and cultures. These, he calls, as is well known, the archetypes of the imagination" (Gaston Bachelard).

Through practice, Jung believed it was possible to establish a relationship between the ego and the self. He called this relationship "active imagination," which allows the ego to question the self and find answers in dreams.

Jung supported Nazism for a time between the two world wars. This aberration has been analyzed and explained by the incest he suffered at the hands of an uncle as a child. Like some people who were abused in early childhood, he was fascinated by the male omnipotence he found embodied in Nazism."
(Pierre Trigano on the radio program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on September 24, 2019).

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/faut-il-tuer-freud-24-carl-gustav-jung-le-dissident-mystique

E3.2.2_REF2_PH DELEUZE ARGUES THAT THE "MECHANISM OF THE BODY" AND ITS "SPONTANEITY" ARE WHAT ALLOW THE MIND TO BECOME A SUBJECT. The "I" is not a ghost in the machine; it is the result of the machine's "dispositions."
"We just saw how time changes when the subject is formed in the mind. Now, we can move on to the second point: What becomes of the organism? Previously, it was presented only as a mechanism of distinct perceptions. Now, saying that the subject is constituted in the mind means that, under the influence of principles, the organism takes on a double spontaneity.
 

First, there is a spontaneity of relation. "When an idea is conceived, the animal spirits rush into all the neighboring traces and awaken related ideas." In order for animal minds to find, in neighboring traces, ideas linked to the initial idea, the mind must first associate these ideas; the mechanism of distinct perceptions must intersect with a physical spontaneity of relationships in the body itself, a spontaneity that depends on the same principles as subjectivity. The body was previously considered only as the mind—the collection of ideas and impressions in the mechanism of their distinct production. Now, the body is considered as the subject itself, in the spontaneity of the relationships it establishes between ideas under the influence of principles.

On the other hand, there is a spontaneity of disposition. As we have seen, it was important for Hume to distinguish between two kinds of impressions: impressions of sensation and impressions of reflection. Our entire problem depends on this distinction because impressions of sensation only form the mind and give it an origin. Impressions of reflection, on the other hand, constitute the subject in the mind and qualify the mind in various ways. Hume presents these impressions of reflection as part of the collection, but they must first be formed. In their formation, they depend on a particular process and on principles that are the principles of subjectivity.

The mind cannot extract a new, original idea by contemplating all its sensations a thousand times unless nature has fashioned its faculties to feel a new, original impression arising from such contemplation.

The problem, then, is to understand the new dimension that the principles of subjectivity confer on the body when constituting impressions of reflection in the mind. Impressions of sensation are defined by a mechanism and refer to the body as the process of that mechanism. Impressions of reflection, however, are defined by spontaneity and a disposition and refer to the body as the biological source of that spontaneity. Hume analyzes this new dimension of the body by studying the passions. The organism is disposed to produce passion and has a particular and specific disposition to the passion in question as "a primitive internal movement." This is the case with hunger, thirst, and sexual desire. However, one might object that not all passions are like this. There are passions such as pride, humility, love, hate, and love between the sexes, as well as joy and sorrow, to which no particular bodily disposition corresponds. This is because nature does not produce these passions "immediately of itself," but "must be seconded by the operation of other causes." These causes are natural but not original. In other words, in this case, an external object assumes the role of bodily disposition and produces passion in determinable natural circumstances. Therefore, even in this case, the phenomenon of passion can only be understood based on bodily disposition. Just as nature has given the body certain appetites and inclinations, so too has it acted with regard to the mind. What is the general meaning of disposition? Through passion, it spontaneously provokes the appearance of an idea of the object that responds to the passion."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.2.2_REF2.1_PH "ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS EXPLAINS ONLY THE SUPERFICIAL IN US... ONLY AFFECTIVITY CAN JUSTIFY THE SINGULAR CONTENT, THE DEEP." This deep, singular force (passion/interest) acts as the "Other Within" that drives the conscious mind's associations.
"The particular path of the mind must be studied. There is a whole casuistry to be explored: Why, at a particular moment in a particular consciousness, will this perception evoke this idea rather than another?" The association of ideas does not explain why one idea is evoked rather than another. Therefore, from this point of view, the relationship must be defined as 'that particular circumstance in which we deem it appropriate to compare two ideas, even when they are arbitrarily linked in the imagination.'" While association is necessary to make any relationship possible in general, it does not explain each particular relationship. What gives a relationship its sufficient reason is circumstance.

This notion of circumstance appears constantly in Hume's philosophy. It is at the center of history and makes a science of the particular and differential psychology possible. When Freud and Bergson demonstrate that the association of ideas only explains the superficial aspects of us—the formalism of consciousness—they essentially mean that only affectivity can justify the singular, the profound, and the particular. Undoubtedly, they are right. But Hume never said anything else. He simply believed that the superficial and formal also had to be explained and that this task was the most important. For the rest, he invokes circumstance. For him, this notion always refers to affectivity. We must take the idea that affectivity is a matter of circumstance literally.
These variables define our passions and interests. Understood in this way, a set of circumstances always singularizes a subject since it represents the state of their passions and needs, as well as the distribution of their interests and beliefs. Therefore, we can see that the principles of passion must be combined with the principles of association for the subject to be constituted in the mind. While the latter explains how ideas are associated, only the former can explain why a particular idea is associated at a given moment rather than another. [...]
In all cases, we see that the subject presents itself in the mind under the influence of two kinds of combined principles. It is as if the principles of association give the subject its necessary form while the principles of passion give it its unique content. The latter function as a principle of the subject's individuation. However, this duality does not imply an opposition between the singular and the universal. The principles of passion are no less universal and constant than the others. They define laws in which circumstances play the role of variables. They concern the individual in the sense that a science of the individual can be developed. [...] We can anticipate how this unity will manifest in the subject. If the relationship cannot be separated from circumstances and the subject cannot be separated from singular content that is essential to it, then subjectivity is essentially practical. Its definitive unity will be revealed in the relationships between motive and action, means and end. This unity is the unity of the relationships themselves and of the circumstances. Indeed, these means-end and motive-action relationships are relationships, but they are also something else. The fundamental proposition of empiricism is that there is no theoretical subjectivity and that there cannot be any. On closer inspection, this is just another way of saying that the subject is constituted in the given. If the subject is constituted in the given, then there is no subject other than the practical one."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.2.2_REF3_PO. A_René Magritte_Not to be reproduced, 1937_A picture of a portrait looking at a portrait of himself framed as a mirror

"I IS ANOTHER."
“I want to be a poet, and I am working to become a seer: you will not understand at all, and I can hardly explain it to you. It is a matter of reaching the unknown by disrupting all the senses. The suffering is enormous, but one must be strong, be born a poet, and I have recognized myself as a poet. It is not my fault at all. It is wrong to say: I think: one should say: I am thought. - Pardon the pun. - I is another.”
(Arthur Rimbaud. Letter to Georges Izambard - May 13, 1871)

"For I is another. If the copper awakens as a bugle, it is not its fault. It is obvious to me: I witness the blossoming of my thought: I watch it, I listen to it: I strike a bow: the symphony stirs in the depths, or leaps onto the stage. [...]
I say that one must be a seer, make oneself a seer.
The Poet makes himself a seer through a long, immense, and reasoned derangement of all the senses. All forms of love, suffering, madness; he seeks himself, he exhausts all poisons within himself, to retain only their quintessences. Ineffable torture, where he needs all his faith, all his superhuman strength, where he becomes among all the great sick man, the great criminal, the great accursed, and the supreme Scholar! For he arrives at the unknown! Since he has cultivated his soul, already rich, more than any other! He arrives at the unknown, and when, in a state of panic, he ends up losing the intelligence of his visions, he has seen them! Let him die in his leap through unheard-of and unnameable things: other horrible workers will come; they will begin with the horizons where the other has collapsed."
(Arthur Rimbaud, Letter to Paul Demeny - May 15, 1871)

E3.2.2_REF4_PH REASON IS A KIND OF FEELING" AND A "CALM DETERMINATION OF THE PASSIONS." This means the "rational self" we identify with is actually just a stabilized form of the "Other Within" (passion/instinct).

"Every idea derives from a corresponding impression; consequently, every impression is reproduced in an idea that represents it exactly. [...]
The characteristic feature of reflective impressions and the effects of principles is that they qualify the mind as a subject in various ways. Therefore, what is revealed from the affections is the idea of this subjectivity. The word 'idea' can no longer have the same meaning. The psychology of affections is the philosophy of a constituted subject.
This is the philosophy that rationalism has lost. Hume's philosophy is a sharp critique of representation. Hume does not critique relations, but rather representations because they cannot present relations. By making representation a criterion and placing the idea in reason, rationalism has placed in the idea what cannot be constituted in the first sense of experience. This includes what cannot be given without contradiction in an idea: the idea's own generality and the existence of the object. It also includes the meaning of the words "always," "universal," "necessary," and "true." Rationalism transferred the determination of the mind to external objects. This removed the meaning and understanding of practice and the subject from philosophy. In fact, reason is an affection of the mind, not the mind itself. In this sense, it will be called instinct, habit, or nature.

Reason is nothing more than a calm and general determination of the passions based on reflection or a distant view.

Reason is a kind of feeling. Thus, just as the philosophical method goes from an absence of ideas to a presence of impressions, the theory of reason goes from skepticism to positivism—from skepticism of reason to a feeling-based positivism that ultimately includes reason as a reflection of feeling in the qualified mind. [...]"
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.3. The Self as Hoax: Deconstructing the "I" as a "Controlled Hallucination". We become a stranger to this fiction by realizing its illusory nature.

E3.3.1. The Phenomenological Void — The Search for a "Whole Self". When we look inward via introspection or logic, we never find a unified "I," but rather a chaotic collection of perceptions, memories, and sensations. The "self" is not a substance, but a "bundle" or an "aggregate."

E3.3.1_REF1_PH I NEVER CAN CATCH MYSELF AT ANY TIME WITHOUT A PERCEPTION, AND NEVER CAN OBSERVE ANY THING BUT THE PERCEPTION.
"For my part, when I enter most intimately into what I call myself, I always stumble on some particular perception
or other, of heat or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or pleasure. I never can catch myself at any time without a perception, and never can observe any thing but the perception. When my perceptions are removed for any time, as by sound sleep; so long am I insensible of myself, and may truly be said not to exist. And were all my perceptions removed by death, and could I neither think, nor feel, nor see, nor love, nor hate after the dissolution of my body, I should be entirely annihilated, nor do I conceive what is farther requisite to make me a perfect non-entity. If any one, upon serious and unprejudiced reflection thinks he has a different notion of himself, I must confess I call reason no longer with him. All I can allow him is, that he may be in the right as well as I, and that we are essentially different in this particular. He may, perhaps, perceive something simple and continued,
which he calls himself; though I am certain there is no such principle in me."
(David Hume,A Treatise of Human Nature, Book I, Part 4, section VI)

E3.3.1_REF2_LIT A_Chen Kong Fang_Penteadeira com espelho_1981

"THERE IS NO WHOLE SELF. HE WHO DEFINES PERSONAL IDENTITY AS THE PRIVATE POSSESSION OF SOME DEPOSITORY OF MEMORIES IS MISTAKEN.Whoever affirms such a thing is abusing the symbol that solidifies memory in the form of an enduring and tangible granary or warehouse, when memory is no more than the noun by which we imply that among the innumerable possible states of consciousness, many occur again in an imprecise way. Moreover, if I root personality in remembrance, what claim of ownership can be made on the elapsed instants that, because they were quotidian or stale, did not stamp us with a lasting mark? Heaped up over years, they lie buried, inaccessible to our avid longing. And that much-vaunted memory to whose ruling you made appeal, does it ever manifest all its past plenitude? Does it truly live? The sensualists and their ilk, who conceive of your personality as the sum of your successive states of mind, are similarly deceiving them­ selves. On closer scrutiny, their formula is no more than an ignominious circumlocution that undermines the very foundation it constructs, an acid that eats away at itself, a prattling fraud and a belabored contradiction. [...]
I do not deny this consciousness of being, nor the immediate security of here I am that it breathes into us. What I do deny is that all our other convictions must be adjusted to the customary antithesis between the self and the non-self, and that this antithesis is constant. The sensation of cold, of spacious and pleasurable suppleness, that is in me as I open the front door and go out along the half-darkness of the street is neither a supplement to a pre-existing self nor an event that comes coupled to the other event of a continuing and rigorous self. […]
There is no whole self. It suffices to walk any distance along the inexorable rigidity that the mirrors of the past open to us in order to feel like outsiders, naively flustered by our own bygone days. There is no community of intention in them, nor are they propelled by the same breeze. [...]
I, for example, am not the visual reality that my eyes encompass, for if I were, darkness would kill me and nothing would remain in me to desire the spectacle of the world, or even to forget it. Nor am I the audible world that I hear, for in that case silence would erase me and I would pass from sound to sound without memory of the previous one. Subsequent identical lines of argument can be directed toward the senses of smell, taste, and touch, proving not only that I am not the world of appearances — a thing generally known and undisputed — but that the apperceptions that indicate that world are not my self either. That is, I am not my own activity of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching. Nor am I my body, which is a phenomenon among others. Up to this point the argument is banal; its distinction lies in its application to spiritual matters. Are desire, thought, happiness, and distress my true self? The answer, in accordance with the precept, is clearly in the negative, since those conditions expire without annulling me with them. Consciousness — the final hideout where we might track down the self­ — also proves unqualified. Once the emotions, the extraneous perceptions, and even ever-shifting thought are dismissed, consciousness is a barren thing, without any appearance reflected in it to make it exist. [...]
The self [is] a mere logical imperative, without qualities of its own or distinctions from individual to individual."
(Jorge Luis Borges , The Nothingness of Personality, 1922 - found in the posthumous collection Selected Non-Fictions)

E3.3.1_REF3_PH "SELF 
The subject, considered in its objectivity. This contradiction makes it elusive, if not impossible. Buddhism teaches that there is no self, either in me (no atman) or in everything (no Brahman). Only aggregates and processes exist, and they are all conditioned and impermanent. This means that the subject is not a substance but a story. It is not an essence, but rather an accident or several accidents. Not a principle, but a result—always ephemeral. Such is also the spirit of our human sciences."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E3.3.2. The Architecture of the Hoax — Fiction, Association, and Prediction. The brain/mind operates on "delirium" and "prediction," using principles of association to synthesize a "subject" out of chaos. The "I" is an effect of these processes, not the cause of them.

E3.3.2_REF1_LIT DANIEL DENNETT' CALLS THE "GREAT DENIAL," THE PHILOSOPHICAL POSITION THAT SUBJECTIVE INTERIOR EXPERIENCE IS AN ILLUSORY "CARTESIAN THEATER" PRODUCED BY THE BRAIN'S UNCONSCIOUS COMPUTATIONS, rendering introspection a fabricated story with no real access to or control over thought.
“Metaphors are typically abandoned once they are proven to be insufficient. But in some cases, they become only more entrenched: the limits of the comparison come to redefine the concepts themselves. This latter tactic has been taken up by the eliminativists, philosophers who claim that consciousness simply does not exist. Just as computers can operate convincingly without any internal life, so can we. According to these thinkers, there is no “hard problem” because that which the problem is trying to explain—interior experience—is not real. The philosopher Galen Strawson has dubbed this theory “the Great Denial,” arguing that it is the most absurd conclusion ever to have entered into philosophical thought—though it is one that many prominent thinkers espouse. Chief among the deniers is Daniel Dennett, who has often insisted that the mind is illusory. Dennett refers to the belief in interior experience derisively as the “Cartesian theater,” invoking the popular delusion—again, Descartes’s fault—that there exists in the brain some miniature perceiving entity, a homunculus that is watching the brain’s representations of the external world projected onto a movie screen and making decisions about future actions. One can see the problem with this analogy without any appeals to neurobiology: if there is a homunculus in my brain, then it must itself (if it is able to perceive) contain a still smaller homunculus in its head, and so on, in infinite regress.
Dennett argues that the mind is just the brain and the brain is nothing but computation, unconscious all the way down. What we experience as introspection is merely an illusion, a made-up story that causes us to think we have “privileged access” to our thinking processes. But this illusion has no real connection to the mechanics of thought, and no ability to direct or control it. Some proponents of this view are so intent on avoiding the sloppy language of folk psychology that any reference to human emotions and intentions is routinely put in scare quotes. We can speak of brains as “thinking,” “perceiving,” or “understanding” so long as it’s clear that these are metaphors for the mechanical processes. “The idea that, in addition to all of those, there is this extra special something—subjectivity—that distinguishes us from the zombie,” Dennett writes, “that’s an illusion.”
Most people, like Strawson, find this logically absurd, though it’s hard to object without sounding defensive, full of wounded pride. I want to insist that this is unfair, that finding a conclusion logically unsatisfying is not the same as finding it merely unflattering. But then I wonder whether I am capable of really knowing the difference. If most of my thinking is in fact unconscious—if I have no “privileged access” to the workings of my brain—then how can I claim to be an authority on my own motives? Perhaps some deep limbic instinct is impelling me to deny the theory, which is then expressed through my brain’s speech center in terms of rational principles. The more I read about theories of mind, the more I’ve come to see my interior life as a hall of mirrors, capable of all kinds of tricks and sleights of hand. Perhaps it’s true that consciousness does not really exist—that, as Brooks put it, we “overanthropomorphize humans.” If I am capable of attributing life to all kinds of inanimate objects, then can’t I do the same to myself? In light of these theories, what does it mean to speak of one’s “self” at all?”
(Meghan OGieblyn, God Human Animal Machine, 2021)

E1.7.C.2.5_REF1_SCI.wE3.3.2.
"Strogatz (32:37): Well, alright, so as we move toward the end of our discussion here, I think we should start talking about the self. I’m  reminded of expressions that you have been using earlier in this conversation where you say things like, “the brain’s best guess,” or “the brain is trying to make sense of…” It almost makes me picture what people used to call the omunculus. Like, there’s a little person inside your head who’s looking out through your eyes, trying to make sense of the world. It’s sort of: the self, what is it? I mean, who’s in  there? Who is it that’s trying to make sense?

Seth (33:09): Yeah, I mean, so this is why when I say the brain believes this, or the brain predicts this, I tried to be careful to say the brain rather than you. Because I think the experience of being you, the experience of self, is another kind of controlled hallucination. It’s another kind of brain-based best guess, OK? And this is another challenge to this sort of naive how-things-seem view of perception.

(33:32) Now, just as it seems as though there’s a real world out there that just pours itself into our minds, it might also seem to us that the self is the thing that does the perceiving. This quiddity, this essence of you or me, maybe the soul that resides somewhere homunculus-like inside the skull, doing all the perceiving and then deciding what to do and then pulling various meat strings in the body to make actions happen.

(34:00) And I think this is fundamentally mistaken. And again, this is not a new thing to say. Here, the philosopher David Hume, Scottish philosopher, had what he called “the bundle theory of self,” which is the idea that the nature of self is just an ongoing collection of perceptions. It’s not the thing that does the perceiving. It’s another kind of perception, but this time based at least in part on the body. So just as the brain, in trying to make sense of what’s out there in the world, is making predictions about the causes of signals that come into
the eyes and the ears and so on, it’s also trying to figure out what’s happening inside the body and trying to also control the body too. And this also happens, in my view anyway, through a process of the brain creating predictions and using them to update sensory signals, but in this case from the body. Or when making actions to use predictions to actually, you know, overwhelm sensory data so they become selffulfilling predictions, so that if I move my arm to pick up the cup again, now that’s a kind of self-fulfilling prediction about where my arm will be.

(35:10) But the key point is that there’s a common principle here underlying experiences of the world, and experiences of the self. They’re both forms of perceptual prediction. Neither of them reflect things as they really are. And both can be subject to illusions — they can both go awry in various ways.

(35:32) So lots of the book is kind of taking this idea that we build up about how our perception of the world works, and then turning the lens inward to understand how the same core principle can explain experiences of selfhood. And these include not just the sort of highlevel aspects of self that “I’m Anil Seth, and I live in Brighton” and so on and so on, and “I remember this funny story about getting a ticket in San Diego.” But much more basic elements of self too, like the fact that this object that I call my body is part of myself — emotions and moods are part of self, experiences of free will. Now, they are not the consequences of some almost supernatural causal power that sweeps in and changes the course of physical events in the world. No, that’s another kind of perception of what my body is doing.

(36:23) I’ve come to think this is a very satisfying view of self, that all these diferent elements of what it is to be me or to be you can be understood as forms of perception that play some role in guiding the behavior of the organism. And it can also help us understand what happens when these processes go wrong. There’s so many conditions in psychiatry and neurology, and that we can induce in the lab using virtual reality, where we can tease apart these elements of self so that some remain and some are altered. The more you do this, the less sense it makes to presume that there is such a thing as a unified, stable, unchanging essence of anyone."
(From the transcript of the podcast: What is the nature of consciousness, The joy of why, Quanta Magazine, May31, 2023)

E3.3.2_REF2_CUR In Paul Verhoeven's film Total Recall (1990), Lori (played by Sharon Stone) reveals to Douglas Quaid (Arnold Schwarzenegger) that their marriage is a lie: she explains that his memories have been implanted by the Agency and that she is responsible for watching over him. Douglas then wonders who he really is.

Watch the scene on YouTube:
https://youtu.be/1HtueYLBJ94

E3.3.2_REF3_PH  A_Daniel Senise_Legenda_2008_(1) ; A_Daniel Senise_Legenda_2008_(2) ; A_Daniel Senise_Legenda_2008_(3) ; A_Daniel Senise_Legenda_2008_(4) /Daniel Senise/

FOR HUME,SUBJECTIVITY IS NOT AS A GIVEN ENTITY BUT AS A PRACTICAL SYNTHESIS CONSTITUTED WITHIN THE MIND THROUGH THE TRANSFORMATIVE PRINCIPLES OF ASSOCIATION AND PASSION, a process where imagination (or fiction) paradoxically becomes a foundational principle of human nature itself, creating the illusion of continuity and identity necessary for a coherent system of knowledge and action. 
“"Fiction becomes a principle of human nature." That is the most important point. Indeed, the meaning of the principles of human nature is to transform a collection of ideas into a system of knowledge and objects. However, for a system to exist, ideas must not only be associated in the mind, but perceptions must also be grasped as separate from the mind. Impressions must, in a sense, be torn from the senses. The object of the idea must have an existence independent of the senses. The objects of knowledge must truly be objects. The principles of association, the vividness of the impression, and simple belief are not enough to achieve this. The system is complete when "an interruption in the appearance to the senses" is overcome by the fiction of a continuous being that fills these intervals and preserves a perfect and complete identity in our perceptions.

Belief in the existence of bodies breaks down into several moments. First is the principle of identity, a product of the fiction by which we apply the idea of time to an unchanging, continuous object. Next is the confusion by which we attribute previous identities to similar impressions because the easy transition—an effect of resemblance—resembles the effect produced by considering the identical object. Finally, there is a new fiction: continuous existence. This fiction is used to overcome the contradiction that arises between the discontinuity of impressions and the identities we have attributed to them. And that's not all. It may be surprising that, a few pages later, Hume first presents the reconciliation achieved by the fiction of continuous existence as satisfactory and then as false, requiring other fictions and reconciliations. On the one hand, continuous existence aligns well with the discontinuity of appearances. Therefore, it can legitimately unite discontinuous images and the perfect identity we attribute to them. However, it is important to note that this attribution of identity is false, our perceptions are interrupted, and the assertion of continuous existence makes an illegitimate use of the principles of human nature. Moreover, this use itself is a principle. The opposition is internal, at the heart of the imagination. The difference between imagination and reason has become a contradiction.

Imagination tells us that our similar perceptions have continuous, uninterrupted existence, and their absence does not destroy them. However, reflection tells us that our perceptions are discontinuous and differ from one another.


According to Hume, the contradiction lies between extension and reflection, imagination and reason, and the senses and understanding. However, these terms are not ideal, as they also apply to general rules. Elsewhere, Hume expresses this better: "between the principles of imagination and the principles of reason." In previous chapters, we continually demonstrated the opposition between reason and imagination and between human nature and fantasy. First, we saw how the principles of human nature fix the imagination. Then, we saw how the imagination recovers beyond this fixation. Finally, we saw how reason corrects this recovery. Now, however, at the last moment, the opposition has truly become a contradiction, and the imagination asserts itself on a specific point. This final moment is also a beginning. For the first time, the imagination opposes itself as a principle—the principle of the world—to the principles that fix it and the operations that correct it. Since fiction is among the principles, along with the world, the principles of association encounter fiction and oppose it without being able to destroy it. The most internal opposition asserts itself between constituted and constituent imaginations, between the principles of association and the fiction that has become a principle of nature.

Fiction, or extension, can no longer be understood, corrected, or destroyed by reflection precisely because it has become a principle.”
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.3.2_REF3.1_PH THE SUBJECT'S CORE FUNCTION IS TO "BELIEVE" AND "INFER"—TO ADD SOMETHING TO THE "GIVEN" THAT ISN'T ACTUALLY THERE. The "I" is a synthetic system we impose on the chaos of experience.
"We believed that we had discovered the core of empiricism within the specific issue of subjectivity. First, however, we must ask how subjectivity is defined. The subject is defined as a movement that develops itself. The subject develops itself. The only meaning that can be attributed to the concept of subjectivity is mediation and transcendence. However, we should note that the process of developing oneself or becoming other is twofold: the subject both surpasses and reflects itself. Hume recognized these two dimensions and presented them as the fundamental characteristics of human nature: inference and invention, belief and artifice. [...]


Believing and inventing are what the subject does.

Believing is inferring one part of nature from another part that is not given. To invent is to distinguish powers and constitute functional totalities that are not given in nature either. This subject, which invents and believes, constitutes itself within the given in such a way that it transforms the given into a synthesis or system. This must be explained. In this problem, we discover the absolute essence of empiricism. Philosophy in general has always sought a plane of analysis from which to examine the structures of consciousness—that is, criticism—and justify experience as a whole. Therefore, critical philosophies are initially opposed by a difference in plane. We engage in transcendental criticism when we ask: How can anything be given to a subject? How can the subject give itself anything? How can there be anything given? To do so, we must place ourselves on a methodically reduced plane that gives us an essential certainty, a certainty of essence. [...]

Hume's merit lies in identifying this empirical problem in its pure state and keeping it separate from the transcendental and the psychological."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.3.2_REF3.2_PH A_Antonio Dias_The place, map, mind_(1) ; A_Antonio Dias_The place, map, mind_(2) ; A_Antonio Dias_The place, map, mind_(3) /Antonio Dias/

DELEUZE DEFINES THE TRANSITION FROM "MIND" TO "SUBJECT" AS A MOVEMENT OF BELIEF AND ARTIFICE. THE SELF IS NOT A THING FOUND; IT IS A SYSTEM CREATED.
"We will say that, at the very least, the given gives itself to the senses and presupposes organs, or even a brain. Undoubtedly, but what must always be avoided is attributing an organization to the organism that will only come when the subject comes to mind. In other words, an organization that depends on the same principles as the subject. In an essential text, Hume considers a physiological explanation of association and subjectivity.

When we conceive an idea, animal spirits rush into neighboring traces, awakening related ideas.

Hume presents this explanation as 'probable and plausible'; however, he deliberately neglects it. When he invokes it, he does so not to explain association but rather the errors arising from it. Such a cerebral organization gives us a valid physiological model of the associative process but presupposes the principles on which it depends. Therefore, it cannot account for them. In short, organisms and the senses do not inherently possess the characteristics of human nature or subjectivity; they must receive them from elsewhere. The body's mechanism cannot explain the subject's spontaneity by itself. An organ is only a collection of impressions considered in the mechanism of their appearance.

External objects are seen and touched; then, they become present to the mind. In other words, they acquire a relationship instead of a cluster of joint perceptions.

In short, we always come back to the same conclusion: The mind—a collection of perceptions—cannot claim to be anything other than itself.

But what does it claim to be when it claims to be itself? The collection remains arbitrary; every idea and impression can disappear or separate from the mind without contradiction. How can we talk about the given or the mind in general? What is the consistency of the mind? [...]

"Five notes played on a flute give us the impression and idea of time, even though time is not a sixth impression that presents itself to the ear or any other sense." Similarly, the idea of space is merely the concept of visible or tangible points arranged in a specific order. Space is discovered in the arrangement of visible and tangible objects, just as time is discovered in the perceptible succession of changing objects.

Thus, the given is not in space; space is in the given. Space and time exist in the mind. [...]

We observe a continual succession of perceptions in the mind, so the idea of time is always present.

Perception is composed of parts. These parts are arranged in such a way as to give us the notions of distance and contiguity, length, width, and thickness.

Now, we must ask the following question: When we talk about the subject, what do we mean? We mean that imagination, from a simple collection, becomes a faculty; the distributed collection becomes a system. The given is taken up in a movement that goes beyond the given, and the mind becomes human nature. The subject invents and believes. It is a synthesis of the mind. We will pose three questions: First, what are the characteristics of the subject in terms of belief and invention? Second, by what principles does the subject constitute itself in this way? What factors have transformed the mind? Finally, what are the different stages of this mental process? What are the moments of the system?"
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.3.2_REF3.3_PH "PRINCIPLES OF ASSOCIATION" (RESEMBLANCE, CONTIGUITY, CAUSALITY) BUILD THE FICTION OF THE “I”. THESE PRINCIPLES "NATURALIZE" THE MIND, GIVING IT A FALSE SENSE OF CONSTANCY AND UNITY.
“What factor will transform the mind? We have seen that Hume's answer is simple. What transforms the mind into a subject and constitutes a subject in the mind are the principles of human nature. These principles are of two kinds: the principles of association and the principles of passion. The latter can be presented in the general form of a principle of utility. A subject is an entity that, under the influence of a principle of utility, pursues a goal or intention, organizes means to an end, and establishes relationships between ideas under the influence of principles of association. Thus, the collection becomes a system. A collection of perceptions becomes a system when they are organized and connected. [...]

Relationships are external to ideas. If they are external, then the problem of the subject, as posed by empiricism, arises: What other causes depend on them? In other words, how is the subject constituted in the collection of ideas? Relationships are external to their terms.

Relationships are an effect of the principles of association. These principles give constancy to the mind and naturalize it. Each principle seems to address a particular aspect of the mind: contiguity to the senses, causality to time, and resemblance to the imagination. They have one thing in common: they designate a quality that naturally leads the mind from one idea to another. We understand the meaning of the word "quality"; the fact that one idea naturally introduces another is not a quality of the idea itself, but rather a quality of human nature. Only human nature is qualitative. Indeed, the collection of ideas will never explain how simple ideas regularly group together to form complex ideas. The ideas "most suited to unite in a complex idea" must be designated to each person. These ideas are not designated in the mind without the mind becoming a subject to which these ideas are assigned—a subject that speaks. Ideas are designated in the mind at the same time that the mind itself becomes a subject."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.3.2_REF4_PO IT IS THE SELF DEPLOYED IN SPACE THAT CREATES ITS OWN MOBILE MATTER, WHICH WE CALL TIME.
"I have no heroes, no values to acknowledge—there is no identity, there is no time, there is only the great sensuality of memory and bodies. [...]
Definition
Time does not exist, it is a pond.
It is the self deployed in space that creates its own mobile matter, which we call time.
For convenience rather than silence."
(Christophe Béguin, War of Beauty, Impeccables, 2011)


"Je n’ai pas de héros, pas de valeurs à reconnaître - il n’y a pas d’identité, il n’y a pas de temps, il y a juste la grande sensualité de la mémoire, et des corps. [...]
Définition 
Le temps n’existe pas, c’est une mare. 
C’est le Je déployé dans l’espace qui créer sa propre matière mobile qu’on appelle temps. 
Par commodité plutôt que par silence. "
(Christophe Béguin, Guerre de beauté, Impeccables, 2011)

E3.3.2_REF5_PH "THE BACKGROUND OF THE MIND IS DELIRIUM"
"Hume consistently asserts the unity of the mind, imagination, and ideas. The mind is not natural; it has no inherent nature. Rather, it is identical to the idea in the mind. Ideas are given as they are; they are experience. The mind is also given. It is merely a collection of ideas, not a system. The previous question can be restated as follows: How does a collection become a system? This collection of ideas is called imagination insofar as it designates not a faculty but the whole of things in the vaguest sense, which appear as collections without albums, plays without theaters, or flows of perceptions. The comparison to theater should not mislead us. We have no knowledge of the place where these scenes are performed or the materials it is made of. The place is no different from what happens there, and the representation is not in a subject." The question remains: How does the mind become a subject? How does the imagination become a faculty?" [...]
No doubt, Hume constantly repeats that the idea is in the imagination. However, the preposition does not indicate the inherent nature of any subject. On the contrary, it is used metaphorically to exclude any activity from the mind that is distinct from the movement of the idea. This ensures the identity of the mind and the idea in the mind. This means that the imagination is not a factor, an agent, or a determining force. Rather, it is a location that must be identified, that is, fixed and determinable. Nothing is done by the imagination; everything is done in the imagination. It is not even a faculty for forming ideas; the production of an idea by the imagination is merely the reproduction of an impression in the imagination. It certainly has its activity, but it is without constancy or uniformity. It is fanciful and delirious, the movement of ideas and the sum of their actions and reactions. As the realm of ideas, fantasy is a collection of individuals. As the link between them, fantasy is the movement that runs through the universe, engendering fire-breathing dragons, winged horses, and monstrous giants. The essence of the mind is delirium—or, which amounts to the same thing from other points of view, chance and indifference. Imagination itself is not a nature, but a fantasy. Constancy and uniformity are not found in my ideas. Nor are they found in the way ideas are linked by imagination; this connection is random. The generality of an idea is not a characteristic of an idea; it does not belong to the imagination. Rather, it is a role that any idea can play under the influence of other principles—not the nature of a species of ideas.
What are these other principles? How does imagination become human nature? Constancy and uniformity only exist in the way ideas are associated in the imagination. Association, in its three principles (contiguity, resemblance, and causality), transcends imagination; it is not imagination. Association affects imagination. Association finds its end and object in the imagination, not its origin. Association is a quality that unites ideas, not a quality of the ideas themselves."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.3.2_REF5.1_PH "SUBJECTIVITY IS DETERMINED AS AN EFFECT... THE MIND BECOMES SUBJECT, BY BEING AFFECTED BY PRINCIPLES."
"Through belief and causality, we will see that the subject transcends the given. In other words, it transcends what the mind provides: I believe in what I have neither seen nor touched. However, if the subject can transcend the given, it is because it is the effect of principles that transcend the mind and affect it. Before belief can exist, the three principles of association organize the given as a system. This imposes constancy on the imagination, which it does not possess on its own. Without this constancy, the imagination would never be human nature. It attributes links and principles of union to ideas that are the original qualities of this nature. These qualities are not characteristics of the idea itself. Causality's privilege is that it alone can make us affirm existence and believe because it gives the idea of the object solidity and objectivity, which it would lack if it were only associated by contiguity or resemblance to the present impression. However, the other two principles share a role with causality. They fix and naturalize the mind, preparing and accompanying belief. This is the unique basis of empiricism: human nature transcends the mind in its principles, so nothing in the mind transcends human nature—nothing is transcendental. Association is a rule of the imagination, not a product or manifestation of its free exercise. Association guides the imagination, making it uniform and constraining it. In this sense, ideas are linked in the mind, not by the mind. Human nature is imagination, but other principles have made it constant and fixed. [...]
The effect of association manifests itself in three forms. The idea either takes on a role and becomes capable of representing all the associated ideas in the imagination by resemblance, forming a general idea, or the union of ideas by the mind acquires a regularity that it did not have before. Second, the union of ideas by the mind acquires a regularity that it did not have before. This is "nature in a way designating to each the simple ideas that are most suitable for uniting into a complex idea": substance and mode. Or, one idea introduces another, forming a relation. In all three cases, the effect of association is the easy passage of the mind from one idea to another. The essence of relation is easy transition. Having become nature, the mind has a tendency. [...]

When Hume speaks of an act of the mind or a tendency, he does not mean that the mind is active but rather that it is activated and has become a subject. The coherent paradox of Hume's philosophy is presenting a subjectivity that transcends itself yet remains passive. Subjectivity is defined as an effect, an impression of reflection. The mind becomes a subject by being affected by principles.
Nature can only be studied scientifically through its effects on the mind. However, the only true science of the mind must have nature as its object.

"Human nature is the only science of man."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.3.2_REF5.2_PH "THE MIND IS NOT SUBJECT, IT IS SUBJECTED."

"Sensory impressions are merely the origin of the mind, while reflective impressions are its qualification, the effect of principles within it. The origin point of view, which states that every idea derives from and represents a pre-existing impression, is not as important as it has been made out to be. This point of view merely gives the mind a simple origin and prevents ideas from representing things, which would make it difficult to understand the resemblance of ideas. The real importance lies in reflective impressions because they qualify the mind as a subject. The essence and destiny of empiricism are not linked to the atom, but to association. Empiricism does not fundamentally pose the problem of the origin of the mind, but rather, the problem of the constitution of the subject." [...]

The mind is not a subject; it is a subject. When the subject is constituted in the mind under the influence of principles, the mind simultaneously grasps itself as an "I" because it is qualified. However, if the subject is constituted only in the collection of ideas, how can the collection of ideas grasp itself as an ego? How can it say "I" under the effect of the same principles? It is unclear how one can transition from tendencies to the ego or from the subject to the ego. How can the subject and the mind ultimately become one in the ego? The self must be a simultaneous collection of ideas and tendencies, as well as a mind and a subject. It is a synthesis—but an incomprehensible one—bringing together, without reconciling them, origin and qualification in its concept.

There are two irreconcilable principles: all our distinct perceptions are distinct existences and the mind never perceives any real connection between them.

Hume adds: Perhaps a solution is possible. We will see later what meaning can be given to this hope."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.3.2_REF5.3_PH THE "I" EXISTS ONLY IN THE RELATIONS, WHICH DO NOT EXIST IN THE THINGS THEMSELVES. THE COHERENT SELF IS THUS AN ADDITION TO REALITY, NOT A PART OF IT.
"THE PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN NATURE

[...] Experience has two meanings, both of which are rigorously defined by Hume. In neither of these meanings is experience constitutive. According to the first meaning, if we define experience as the collection of distinct perceptions, we must acknowledge that relations do not stem from experience. Rather, they are the result of the principles of association—the principles of human nature that constitute a subject capable of transcending experience. If we use the word in its second sense to designate the various conjunctions of objects in the past, we must again recognize that the principles do not come from experience, since experience must be understood as a principle." [...]

The given has two meanings: experience is a collection of ideas that is given, but the subject that transcends experience and the relationships that do not depend on ideas are also given. Thus, empiricism can only be truly defined in terms of dualism. Empirical duality exists between terms and relations or, more precisely, between the causes of perceptions and the causes of relations and between the hidden powers of nature and the principles of human nature. Only this dualism, considered in all its possible forms, can define empiricism and pose this fundamental question: "How is the subject constituted in the given?" The given is the product of the powers of nature, and the subject is the product of the principles of human nature. [...]

We will call any theory that, in one way or another, asserts that relations derive from the nature of things non-empirical. [...]

The subject is the mind activated by principles. This notion of activation surpasses the alternative. As the principles take effect in the depths of the mind, the subject—which is the effect itself—becomes increasingly active and increasingly less passive. Initially passive, it becomes active by the end. This confirms our idea that subjectivity is a process and that we must consider the various stages of this process. In Bergson's words, the subject is initially an imprint, an impression left by principles. However, it gradually converts into a machine capable of using this impression."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.3.2_REF5.4_PH A_Nevin Aladag_Sessions, still from video_2013_(1) ; A_Nevin Aladag_Sessions, still from video_2013_(2) ; A_Nevin Aladag_Traces, still from video_2015_(1) ; A_Nevin Aladag_Traces, still from video_2015_(2) /Nevin Aladag/

"THE SUBJECT IS THE PRODUCT OF PRINCIPLES IN THE MIND... BY ITSELF, THE MIND IS NOT A SUBJECT." 
 "The subject is the product of principles in the mind, but it is also the mind which exceeds itself. The mind becomes subject by the effect of principles, so that the subject is at the same time constituted by principles and founded on fantasy. How does this happen? By itself, the mind is not a subject: it is a given collection of separate impressions and ideas. An impression is defined by its vivacity; an idea, as a reproduction of the impression. Thus the spirit by itself has two fundamental characteristics: resonance and vivacity. One remembers the metaphor which pictures the mind as a percussion instrument. When does it become a subject? It is when it mobilizes its vivacity in such a way that part of its character (impression) communicates it to the other part (idea), and on the other hand, when all the parts taken together resonate by producing something new. These are the two modes of excelling: belief and invention."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.3.3. The Stranger in the Mirror . The psychological and linguistic reasons we cling to this hoax  are fear, grammar and a desire for security. There is a potential liberation found in realizing the "I" is a fiction.

E3.3.3_REF1_PH "ON BEING AWARE
It must be obvious, from the start, that there is a contradiction in wanting to be perfectly secure in a universe whose very nature is momentariness and fluidity. But the contradiction lies a little deeper than the mere conflict between the desire for security and the fact of change. If I want to be secure, that is, protected from the flux of life, I am wanting to be separate from life. Yet it is this very sense of separateness which makes me feel insecure. To be secure means to isolate and fortify the "I," but it is just the feeling of being an isolated "I" which makes me feel lonely and afraid. In other words, the more security I can get, the more I shall want.

To put it still more plainly: the desire for security and the feeling of insecurity are the same thing. To hold your breath is to lose your breath. A society based on the quest for security is nothing but a breath-retention contest in which everyone is as taut as a drum and as purple as a beet.

We look for this security by fortifying and enclosing ourselves in innumerable ways. We want the protection of being "exclusive" and "special," seeking to belong to the safest church, the best nation, the highest class, the right set, and the "nice" people. These defenses lead to divisions between us, and so to more insecurity demanding more defenses. Of course it is all done in the sincere belief that we are trying to do the right things and live in the best way; but this, too, is a contradiction.

I can only think seriously of trying to live up to an ideal, to improve myself, if I am split in two pieces. There must be a good "I" who is going to improve the bad "me." "I," who has the best intentions, will go to work on wayward "me," and the tussle between the two will very much stress the difference between them. Consequently "I" will feel more separate than ever, and so merely increase the lonely and cut-off feelings which make "me" behave so badly.

We can hardly begin to consider this problem unless it is clear that the craving for security is itself a pain and a contradiction, and that the more we pursue it, the more painful it becomes. This is true in whatever form security may be conceived. [...] 

To understand that there is no security is far more than to agree with the theory that all things change, more even than to observe the transitoriness of life. The notion of security is based on the feeling that there is something within us which is permanent, something which endures through all the days and changes of life. We are struggling to make sure of the permanence, continuity, and safety of this enduring core, this center and soul of our being which we call "I." For this we think to be the real man - the thinker of our thoughts, the feeler of our feelings, and the knower of our knowledge. We do not actually understand that there is no security until we realize that this "I" does not exist."
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

[EN] Alexandra Bircken, Semi-detached house, 2021
"It must be obvious, from the start, that there is a contradiction in wanting to be perfectly secure in a universe whose very nature is momentariness and fluidity. But the contradiction lies a little deeper than the mere conflict between the desire for security and the fact of change. If I want to be secure, that is, protected from the flux of life, I am wanting to be separate from life. Yet it is this very sense of separateness which makes me feel insecure. To be secure means to isolate and fortify the "I," but it is just the feeling of being an isolated "I" which makes me feel lonely and afraid. In other words, the more security I can get, the more I shall want.

To put it still more plainly: the desire for security and the feeling of insecurity are the same thing. To hold your breath is to lose your breath. A society based on the quest for security is nothing but a breath-retention contest in which everyone is as taut as a drum and as purple as a beet. [...]

We can hardly begin to consider this problem unless it is clear that the craving for security is itself a pain and a contradiction, and that the more we pursue it, the more painful it becomes. This is true in whatever form security may be conceived. [...] 

To understand that there is no security is far more than to agree with the theory that all things change, more even than to observe the transitoriness of life. The notion of security is based on the feeling that there is something within us which is permanent, something which endures through all the days and changes of life. We are struggling to make sure of the permanence, continuity, and safety of this enduring core, this center and soul of our being which we call "I." For this we think to be the real man - the thinker of our thoughts, the feeler of our feelings, and the knower of our knowledge. We do not actually understand that there is no security until we realize that this "I" does not exist."
(Alan Watts, The wisdom of insecurity, 1951)

Art:
- Alexandra Bircken, Semi-detached house, 2021

[FR] Alexandra Bircken, Maison jumelée, 2021
"Il doit être évident, dès le départ, qu'il y a une contradiction à vouloir être parfaitement en sécurité dans un univers dont la nature même est l'instantanéité et la fluidité. Mais la contradiction est un peu plus profonde que le simple conflit entre le désir de sécurité et la nature du changement. Si je veux être en sécurité, c'est-à-dire protégé du flux de la vie, je veux être séparé de la vie. Pourtant, c'est ce sentiment même de séparation qui me donne le sentiment d'insécurité. Être en sécurité signifie isoler et fortifier le  « moi », mais c'est justement le sentiment d'être un « moi » isolé qui me fait me sentir seul et avoir peur. En d'autres termes, plus je peux obtenir de sécurité, plus j'en veux.

Pour le dire encore plus clairement : le désir de sécurité et le sentiment d'insécurité sont la même chose. Retenir son souffle, c'est perdre son souffle. Une société fondée sur la recherche de la sécurité n'est rien d'autre qu'un concours de rétention du souffle dans lequel chacun est tendu comme un tambour et violet comme une betterave. [...]

Nous pouvons à peine commencer à considérer ce problème s'il n'est pas clair que la soif de sécurité est elle-même une douleur et une contradiction, et que plus nous la poursuivons, plus elle devient douloureuse. [...] 

Comprendre qu'il n'y a pas de sécurité, c'est bien plus qu'être d'accord avec la théorie selon laquelle tout change, plus même que de constater le caractère éphémère de la vie. La notion de sécurité repose sur le sentiment qu'il existe en nous quelque chose de permanent, quelque chose qui perdure à travers tous les changements de la vie. Nous nous efforçons de nous assurer de la permanence, de la continuité et de la sécurité de ce noyau durable, ce centre et cette âme de notre être que nous appelons « moi ». C'est pour cela que nous pensons être l'être véritable - celui qui pense nos pensées, celui qui ressent nos sentiments et celui qui possède nos connaissances. En fait, nous ne comprenons pas qu'il n'y a pas de sécurité tant que nous ne réalisons pas que ce « je » n'existe pas."
(Alan Watts, La sagesse de l'insécurité, 1951)

Art:
- Alexandra Bircken, Maison jumelée, 2021

E3.3.3_REF2_PO  “DO YOU THINK I KNOW WHAT I'M DOING?
That for one breath or half-breath I belong to myself?
As much as a pen knows what it's writing,
or the ball can guess where it's going next.”
(Rumi, The essential, translated by Coleman Barks, 1207-1273)

E3.3.3_REF3_PH A_Naro Pinosa_Inspiration

NIETZSCHE COMPLETELY REVERSES THE TRADITIONAL NOTION OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE WILL AND THE BODY. Rather than being an instrument of the will, the body emits a will of its own, of which the mind is merely one consequence. 
"When we say « my body » we are the victim of an illusion of language: we think that because we grammatically distinguish the subject and the object, they are in themselves two different things. Nietzsche denounces the grammatical illusion which leads to think that all action has and actor as a  cause, a free subject, endowed with the faculty of the will. Behind the « I » or the « me », which is only a way of speaking, hides a system of moral values in which the body is denigrated in favor of the spirit endowed with a free will. Nietzsche is keen to flush out this interpretation and fight it. For him, on the contrary, it is necessary to question « the bowels of the spirit », in other words consciousness is not the cause, or autonomous instance, but the effect of the « drives » or « life's instinct », in other words the consequence of physiological functions."
(Gilles Deleuze)

E3.3.3_REF4_PH “SUBJECT 
[...]  What is a subject? In logic, it is any being to which a predicate is attributed. For example, in the phrase 'The Earth is round,' the Earth is the subject and 'round' is the predicate. In this sense, the word says nothing about the nature of the subject except that it is a being or entity. [...]
In modern philosophy, the term is more closely associated with theories of knowledge, morality, and even metaphysics. The subject is opposed to the object, representing the entity that knows versus the entity that is known, or the entity that wills and acts versus the entity that is acted upon. [...]
In this sense, we speak of a "philosophy of the subject" with regard to Descartes, Kant, Sartre, and others. The subject is the one who says "I," insofar as he legitimately designates himself as such. He is the one who thinks or acts as the principle of his thoughts or actions rather than as their sum, flow, or result. For example, Descartes wrote, "I think, therefore I am." This is because thinking is a verb which presupposes a subject. It is the metaphysics of a grammarian who takes language as proof or grammar as metaphysics. It's like saying, "It's raining, therefore it is." This does not make rain a subject.
Before Nietzsche, Hume demonstrated in a brilliant chapter of his Treatise that we have no experience and therefore no knowledge of such a subject. We know only "a bundle or collection of different perceptions that follow one another with inconceivable rapidity," and nothing allows us to think that we are anything other than the flow of these perceptions, or that we are their cause, substance, or underlying principle (Treatise of Human Nature, I, IV, 6, "Personal Identity"). This is one of the rare instances in which Western philosophy approaches Buddhism without knowing it. There is no self, only an illusory one. Everything is just flow and aggregates, impermanence, and process (paticca-samuppada, or "conditioned production"). Only suffering exists, yet no sufferer can be found. Actions exist, yet no actor can be found. There is no immobile motor behind movement. There is no thinker behind thought" (W. Rahula, The Teaching of the Buddha, 2; see also ch. 6). The subject remains nonetheless as a belief, an illusion, or a word, but it explains nothing. It is not who we are, but who we believe ourselves to be. Not a substance, but a hypostasis. Not our truth, but the set of illusions we have about ourselves. It is not the principle of our actions or thoughts, but rather the chain that binds us. It is not a principle, but a story. Not our freedom as subjects, but our subjugation. 
We cannot conclude that we must therefore renounce freedom. Rather, we must recognize that subjectivity alone is insufficient; only truth liberates, and truth is not a subject.
 
Philosophy is no longer of the subject, but of knowledge. Not of freedom, but of liberation: Spinoza, Marx, and Freud. However, I would add one condition: we must not worship nature, history, or the unconscious."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E3.3.3_REF5_PH "EGO
[...] (Sartre, The Transcendence of the Ego, Conclusion: "The ego is not the owner of consciousness; it is its object." See also Being and Nothingness, II, ch. I, 5). The ego is only the subject of thought insofar as it believes it has one, which is why it is nothing.
 
Too often, it is also the main subject of our concerns ("dear little me"), and therefore the principle of selfishness, egocentrism, and egotism. This explains why, under the influence of Eastern spiritualities, the word is often taken in a negative sense (it corresponds roughly to the Sanskrit ahamkāra). The ego is less the subject that I am—if I am one—than the illusory subject that I believe myself to be or would like to be: the whole that is difficult to bear and inconvenient to myself and others; the illusions that I have about myself that I love without understanding, which ultimately separate me from others and everything. Only truth can set us free, and truth has no ego. This is why, in India, it is often said that the wise man is "without ego" (nirahamkâra). However, this is only an ideal. To achieve it, one would have to be nothing but truth."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E3.4. Reclaiming the Stranger: Is this "stranger" we've found a void, or is it a truer self? We become a stranger to our static, past self to make way for a more dynamic, authentic one.

E3.4.1. The Prison of Character: Why We Become Strangers to Ourselves. What we call "character" or "identity" is often a defense mechanism (an armor) or a form of stagnation. A sensation of alienation, boredom, or "shut-upness" arises when we are trapped in a fixed identity, necessitating an escape.

E3.4.1_REF1_PH ERNEST BECKER ARGUES THAT HUMAN CHARACTER IS A NECESSARY BUT IMPRISONING LIE WE CONSTRUCT TO DENY THE FUNDAMENTAL TERROR OF OUR CREATURELINESS, AND THAT TRUE SELF-TRANSCENDENCE CAN ONLY BE ACHIEVED BY PARADOXICALLY EMBRACING THIS ANXIETY AND FEELING UTTERLY LOST.
“What sense does it make to talk about “enjoying one’s full humanness”—as Maslow urges along with so many others—if “full humanness” means the primary mis-adjustment to the world? If you get rid of the four-layered neurotic shield, the armor that covers the characterological lie about life, how can you talk about “enjoying” this Pyrrhic victory? The person gives up something restricting and illusory, it is true, but only to come face to face with something even more awful: genuine despair. Full humanness means full fear and trembling, at least some of the waking day. When you get a person to emerge into life, away from his dependencies, his automatic safety in the cloak of someone else’s power, what joy can you promise him with the burden of his aloneness? When you get a person to look at the sun as it bakes down on the daily carnage taking place on earth, the ridiculous accidents, the utter fragility of life, the powerlessness of those he thought most powerful—what comfort can you give him from a psychotherapeutic point of view? Luis Buñuel likes to introduce a mad dog into his films as counterpoint to the secure daily routine of repressed living. The meaning of his symbolism is that of view? Luis Buñuel likes to introduce a mad dog into his films as counterpoint to the secure daily routine of repressed living. The meaning of his symbolism is that no matter what men pretend, they are only one accidental bite away from utter fallibility. The artist disguises the incongruity that is the pulse-beat of madness but he is aware of it. What would the average man do with a full consciousness of absurdity? He has fashioned his character for the precise purpose of putting it between himself and the facts of life; it is his special tour-de-force that allows him to ignore incongruities, to nourish himself on impossibilities, to thrive on blindness. He accomplishes thereby a peculiarly human victory: the ability to be smug about terror. Sartre has called man a “useless passion” because he is so hopelessly bungled, so deluded about his true condition. He wants to be a god with only the equipment of an animal, and so he thrives on fantasies. As Ortega so well put it in the epigraph we have used for this chapter, man uses his ideas for the defense of his existence, to frighten away reality. This is a serious game, the defense of one’s
existence—how take it away from people and leave them joyous?
Maslow talks very convincingly about “self-actualization” and the ecstasy of “peak experiences” wherein a person comes to see the world in all its awe and splendor and senses his own free inner expansion and the miracle of his being. Maslow calls this state “being cognition,” the openness of perception to the truth of the world, a truth concealed by the neurotic distortions and illusions that protect one against overwhelming experiences. This idea is fine and correct, this enjoinder to develop the capacity for “being cognition” in order to break out of the one-dimensionality of our lives, the cave of our imprisoning security. But like most things human it is a very paradoxical kind of triumph. This was already clearly seen by Maslow, when he talked about the “dangers of being-cognition.” Maslow was too broad-minded and sober to imagine that being-cognition did not have an underside; but he didn’t go far enough toward pointing out what a dangerous underside it was—that it could undermine one’s whole position in the world. It can’t be overstressed, one final time, that to see the world as it really is is devastating and
terrifying. It achieves the very result that the child has painfully built his character over the years in order to avoid: it makes routine, automatic, secure, self-confident activity impossible. It makes thoughtless living in the world of men an impossibility. It places a trembling animal at the mercy of the entire cosmos and the problem of the meaning of it. […]

The tragedy of life that Searles is referring to is the one we have been discussing: man’s finitude, his dread of death and of the overwhelmingness of life. The schizophrenic feels these more than anyone else because he has not been able to build the confident defenses that a person normally uses to deny them. The schizophrenic’s misfortune is that he has been burdened with extra anxieties, extra guilt, extra helplessness, an even more unpredictable and unsupportive
environment. He is not surely seated in his body, has no secure base from which to negotiate a defiance of and a denial of the real nature of the world. The parents have made him massively inept as an organism. He has to contrive extra-ingenious and extra-desperate ways of living in the world that will keep him from being torn apart by experience, since he is already almost apart. We see again confirmed the point of view that a person’s character is a defense against despair, an attempt to avoid insanity because of the real nature of the world. Searles looks at schizophrenia precisely as the result of the inability to shut out terror, as a desperate style
of living with terror. Frankly I don’t know anything more cogent that needs to be said about this syndrome: it is a failure in humanization, which means a failure to confidently deny man’s real situation on this planet. Schizophrenia is the limiting test case for the theory of character and reality that we have been expounding here: the failure to build dependable character defenses allows the true nature of reality to appear to man. It is scientifically apodictic. The creativity of people on the schizophrenic end of the human continuum is a creativity that springs from the inability to accept the standardized cultural denials of the real nature of experience.
And the price of this kind of almost “ extra human” creativity is to live on the brink of madness, as men have long known. The schizophrenic is supremely creative in an almost extra-human sense because he is furthest from the animal: he lacks the secure instinctive programming of lower organisms; and he lacks the secure cultural programming of average men. No wonder he appears to average men as “crazy”: he is not in anything’s world. […]

Kierkegaard’s whole understanding of man’s character is that it is a structure built up to avoid perception of the “terror, perdition [and] annihilation [that] dwell next door to every man.” He understood psychology the way a contemporary psychoanalyst does: that its task is to discover the strategies that a person uses to avoid anxiety. What style does he use to function automatically and uncritically in the world, and how does this style cripple his true growth and freedom of action and choice? Or, in words that are almost Kierkegaard’s: how is a person being enslaved by his characterological lie about himself?
Kierkegaard described these styles with a brilliance that today seems uncanny and with a vocabulary that sums up much of the psychoanalytic theory of character defenses. Whereas today we talk about the “mechanisms of defense” such as repression and denial, Kierkegaard talked about the same things with different terms: he referred to the fact that most men live in a “half-obscurity” about their own condition, they are in a state of “shut-upness” wherein they block off their own perceptions of reality. He understood the compulsive character, the rigidity of the person who has had to build extra-thick defenses against anxiety, a heavy character armor […]

There is no doubt that by “shut-upness” Kierkegaard means what we today refer to by repression; it is the closed personality, the one who has fenced himself around in childhood, not tested his own powers in action, not been free to discover himself and his world in a relaxed way. If the child is not burdened by too much parental blocking of his action, too much infection with the parents’ anxieties, he can develop his defenses in a less monopolizing way, can remain
somewhat fluid and open in character. He is prepared to test reality more in terms of his own action and experimentation and less on the basis of delegated authority and prejudgment or preperception. Kierkegaard understood this difference by making a distinction between “lofty” shut-upness and “mistaken” shut-upness. […]

This is a perfectly contemporary psychoanalytic description of the costs of repression on the total personality. I am omitting Kierkegaard’s more detailed and penetrating analysis of how the person becomes fragmented within himself by the repression, how the real perception of reality dwells under the surface, close at hand, ready to break through the repression, how the repression leaves the personality seemingly intact, seemingly functioning as a whole, in continuity—but how that continuity is broken, how the personality is really at the mercy of the discontinuity expressed by the repression. To a modern, clinically-trained mind such an
analysis must be truly marvelous.
Kierkegaard understood that the lie of character is built up because the child needs to adjust to the world, to the parents, and to his own existential dilemmas. It is built up before the child has a chance to learn about himself in an open or free way, and thus character defenses are automatic and unconscious. The problem is that the child becomes dependent on them and comes to be encased in his own character armor, unable to see freely beyond his own prison or into himself, into the defenses he is using, the things that are determining his unfreedom. The best that the child can hope is that his shut-upness will not be of the “mistaken” or massive kind, in which his character is too fearful of the world to be able to open itself to the possibilities of experience. But that depends largely on the parents, on accidents of the environment, as Kierkegaard knew. Most people have parents who have “incurred a great accountability,” and so they are obliged to shut themselves off from possibility. […]

How does one transcend himself; how does he open himself to new possibility? By realizing the truth of his situation, by dispelling the lie of his character,
by breaking his spirit out of its conditioned prison. The enemy, for Kierkegaard as for Freud, is the Oedipus complex. The child has built up strategies and
techniques for keeping his self-esteem in the face of the terror of his situation. These techniques become an armor that hold the person prisoner. The very defenses
that he needs in order to move about with self-confidence and self-esteem become his life-long trap. In order to transcend himself he must break down that which he
needs in order to live. Like Lear he must throw off all his “cultural lendings” and stand naked in the storm of life. Kierkegaard had no illusions about man’s urge to
freedom. He knew how comfortable people were inside the prison of their character defenses. Like many prisoners they are comfortable in their limited and
protected routines, and the idea of a parole into the wide world of chance, accident, and choice terrifies them. We have only to glance back at Kierkegaard’s
confession in the epigraph to this chapter to see why. In the prison of one’s character one can pretend and feel that he is somebody, that the world is manageable,
that there is a reason for one’s life, a ready justification for one’s action. To live automatically and uncritically is to be assured of at least a minimum share of the
programmed cultural heroics—what we might call “prison heroism”: the smugness of the insiders who “know.” […]

Kierkegaard’s torment was the direct result of seeing the world as it really is in relation to his situation as a creature. The prison of one’s character is painstakingly built to deny one thing and one thing alone: one’s creatureliness. The creatureliness is the terror. Once admit that you are a defecating creature and you invite the primeval ocean of creature anxiety to flood over you. But it is more than creature anxiety, it is also man’s anxiety, the anxiety that results from the
human paradox that man is an animal who is conscious of his animal limitation. Anxiety is the result of the perception of the truth of one’s condition. What does it mean to be a self-conscious animal? The idea is ludicrous, if it is not monstrous. It means to know that one is food for worms. This is the terror: to have emerged from nothing, to have a name, consciousness of self, deep inner feelings, an excruciating inner yearning for life and selfexpression—and with all this yet to die. It seems like a hoax, which is why one type of cultural man rebels openly against the idea of God. What kind of deity would create such complex and fancy worm food? Cynical deities, said the Greeks, who use man’s torments for their own amusement.

But now Kierkegaard seems to have led us into an impasse, an impossible situation. He has told us that by realizing the truth of our condition we can transcend ourselves. And on the other hand he tells us that the truth of our condition is our complete and abject creatureliness, which seems to push us down still further on the scale of self-realization, further away from any possibility of self-transcendence. But this is only an apparent contradiction. The flood of anxiety is not
the end for man. It is, rather, a “school” that provides man with the ultimate education, the final maturity. It is a better teacher than reality, says Kierkegaard, the end for man. It is, rather, a “school” that provides man with the ultimate education, the final maturity. It is a better teacher than reality, says Kierkegaard, because reality can be lied about, twisted, and tamed by the tricks of cultural perception and repression. But anxiety cannot be lied about. Once you face up to it, it
reveals the truth of your situation; and only by seeing that truth can you open a new possibility for yourself.
’He who is educated by dread [anxiety] is educated by possibility… . When such a person, therefore, goes out from the school of possibility, and knows more thoroughly than a child knows the alphabet that he demands of life absolutely nothing, and that terror, perdition, annihilation, dwell next door to every man, and has learned the profitable lesson that every dread which alarms may the next instant become a fact, he will then interpret reality differently…’ […]

What Kierkegaard is saying, in other words, is that the school of anxiety leads to possibility only by destroying the vital lie of character. It seems like the ultimate self-defeat, the one thing that one should not do, because then one will have truly nothing left. But rest assured, says Kierkegaard, “the direction is quite normal … the self must be broken in order to become a self… […]

Again—as we saw in the last chapter—this is the destruction of the emotional character armor of Lear, of the Zen Buddhists, of modern psychotherapy, and in fact of self-realized men in any epoch. That great spirit, Ortega, has given us a particularly powerful phrasing of it. His statement reads almost exactly like Kierkegaard:
’The man with the clear head is the man who frees himself from those fantastic “ideas” [the characterological lie about reality] and looks life in the face, realizes that everything in it is problematic, and feels himself lost. And this is the simple truth—that to live is to feel oneself lost—he who accepts it has already begun to find himself, to be on firm ground. Instinctively, as do the shipwrecked, he will look round for something to which to cling, and that tragic, ruthless glance, absolutely sincere, because it is a question of his salvation, will cause him to bring order into the chaos of his life. These are the only genuine ideas; the ideas of the shipwrecked. All the rest is rhetoric, posturing, farce. He who does not really feel himself lost, is without remission; that is to say, he never finds himself, never comes up against his own reality.’
(Ernest Becker, The Denial of Death, 1973)

E3.4.1_REF2_PO ”I’M A FUGITIVE.
I was shut up in myself 
As soon as I was born, 
But I managed to ﬂee.

If people get tired
Of being in the same place, 
Why shouldn’t they tire 
Of having the same self?

My soul seeks me out, 
But I keep on the run 
And sincerely hope
I’ll never be found.

Oneness is a prison.
To be myself is to not be. 
I’ll live as a fugitive
But live really and truly.”
(Fernando Pessoa, 5 April 1931)

E3.4.1_REF3_LIT I RETURN A STRANGER, A GUEST AND PILGRIM OF ITS PRESENTATION, AN OUTSIDER TO WHAT I SEE AND HEAR, OLD TO MYSELF.
"Indeed, boredom is the tedium of the world, the malaise of being alive, and the weariness of having lived. In truth, boredom is the carnal sensation of the prolix vacuity of things. But boredom is more than this: it is the annoyance of other worlds, whether they exist or not; the unease of having to live, even if it is another life or in another way; the weariness of not only yesterday and today but also tomorrow and eternity—if such a thing exists—and nothingness, if that is what eternity is. Not only does the acuity of things and beings hurt the soul when it is bored, but so does the emptiness of something other than things and beings—the emptiness of the soul itself, which feels the void and is disgusted and repudiated by it.
 
Boredom is the physical sensation of chaos, and that chaos encompasses everything. The bored, restless, and tired feel trapped in a small room. Those disgusted by the narrowness of life feel handcuffed in a large cell. But the bored feel trapped by their freedom in an infinite cell. The walls of this cell may collapse on those who are bored or unwell and bury them. Those disheartened by the smallness of the world may have their shackles fall off, allowing them to escape. Alternatively, they may suffer from being unable to remove them and, in the process, experience reviving pain without becoming disheartened. However, the walls of the infinite cell cannot bury us because they do not exist, nor can the shackles that no one has put on us force us to endure pain. [...]
But what? What is there in the high air other than air, which is nothing? What is in the sky other than a color that isn't its own? What are these scraps of less than clouds, which I already doubt, other than reflections of light from a submissive sun? What is there but me? Ah, but boredom is that, it is only that. It's that in all this — sky, earth, world — what there is in all this is nothing but me! [...]

My awareness of the city is my awareness of myself.
I suddenly remembered when I was a child and could see the morning dawn over the city, something I cannot do today. It did not dawn on me then, but rather, it was life itself because I was life, unaware of myself. I saw the morning and felt joy. Today, I see the morning and feel joy and sadness. The child remained, but fell silent. I see as I used to, but I see myself seeing behind my eyes, and this alone obscures the sun for me. The green of the trees seems old, and the flowers wither before they bloom. Yes, I was once from here. Today, with every new landscape, I return a stranger, a guest, and a pilgrim to what I see and hear. I am an outsider to myself, old and new.
 
I have seen everything, even what I have never seen nor will ever see. Even the memory of future landscapes runs in my blood, and the anguish of what I will have to see again is an anticipated monotony.
Leaning on the railing and enjoying the day, I look out over the varied landscape of the entire city. Only one thought fills my soul: the intimate desire to die. I want to see no more light over any city. I want to think no more. I want to feel no more. I want to leave behind the course of the sun and the days like wrapping paper. I want to undress like a heavy costume at the edge of the great bed. I want to leave behind the involuntary effort of being. "
(Fernando Pessoa, The Book of Disquiet, 1914).

E3.4.1_REF4_LIT "WE ALL LIVE DISTANT AND ANONYMOUS LIVES. Disguised, we suffer in obscurity. For some, however, this distance between one's self and one's true self is never revealed. For others, it is occasionally illuminated with horror or sorrow by a boundless flash of lightning. For others still, it is the painful constancy and daily routine of life.
 
Knowing that who we are is not with us, that what we think or feel is always a translation, and that what we want is not what we wanted—perhaps no one else wanted it either—feeling all this in every feeling: is this not being a stranger in one's own soul, exiled in one's own sensations?"
(Fernando Pessoa, The Book of Disquiet, 1914).

E3.4.1_REF5_PO MÁRIO DE SÁ-CARNEIRO’ POEMS ARE SOME OF THE MOST PROFOUND EXPRESSIONS OF SELF-ESTRANGEMENT IN LITERATURE.

“I am neither myself nor the other, 
I am something in between: 
A pillar of the bridge of boredom 
That goes from me to the Other.”
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Gold Traces, Paris, February 1914)


"Eu não sou eu nem sou o outro, 
Sou qualquer coisa de intermédio: 
Pilar da ponte de tédio 
Que vai de mim para o Outro."
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Indícios de Oiro, Paris, fevereiro 1914)

E3.4.1_REF5.1_PO "AS I DO NOT POSSESS
I look around me. Everyone possesses 
affection, a smile, or a hug. 
Only for me do my desires fade away
And I possess nothing even when I embrace.
[...]
I want to feel. I don't know... I lose myself completely... 
I cannot be or become attached to myself: 
I lack the selfishness to ascend to heaven, 
I lack the anointing to sink into the mud.

I am no one's friend. To be one 
I would first have to possess 
Someone I cherished—man or woman, 
And I can never possess anyone!...

Castrated in soul and unable to settle down. 
Afternoon after afternoon I sink into my pain... 
- Am I an emigrant from another world 
That cannot even find himself in his pain?

How I desire the one walking down the street, 
So agile, so wild, so full of love...
How I would like to entangle her naked, 
Drink her in spasms of harmony and color!...

Wrong desire... If I had her one day, 
All without veils, her flesh stylized 
Under my panting body overflowing, 
Even then - oh, longing! - I would not have her...

I would only vibrate agonizingly
Over her body of golden ecstasy,
If it were those upset breasts,
If it were that agglutinating sex...

From the clash with my love, I crumble completely,
And I see myself in ruins even while winning:
It is that I would only have, feeling and being
That which I struggle for and do not possess."
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Dispersion, Paris, May 1913)



"COMO EU NÃO POSSUO

Olho em volta de mim. Todos possuem 
Um afecto, um sorriso ou um abraço. 
Só para mim as ansias se diluem 
E não possuo mesmo quando enlaço.

[...]

Quero sentir. Não sei... perco-me todo... 
Não posso afeiçoar-me nem ser eu: 
Falta-me egoismo pra ascender ao ceu, 
Falta-me unção pra me afundar no lodo.

Não sou amigo de ninguem. Pra o ser 
Forçoso me era antes possuir 
Quem eu estimasse - ou homem ou mulher, 
E eu não logro nunca possuir!...

Castrado d'alma e sem saber fixar-me. 
Tarde a tarde na minha dôr me afundo... 
- Serei um emigrado doutro mundo 
Que nem na minha dôr posso encontrar-me?...

****

Como eu desejo a que ali vai na rua, 
Tão agil, tão agreste, tão de amor...
Como eu quisera emmaranha-la nua, 
Bebê-la em espasmos d'harmonia e côr!...

Desejo errado... Se a tivera um dia, 
Toda sem véus, a carne estilisada 
Sob o meu corpo arfando transbordada, 
Nem mesmo assim - ó ansia! - eu a teria...

Eu vibraria só agonisante
Sobre o seu corpo d'extases dourados, 
Se fosse aqueles seios transtornados, 
Se fosse aquele sexo aglutinante...

De embate ao meu amor todo me rúo, 
E vejo-me em destroço até vencendo:
É que eu teria só, sentindo e sendo 
Aquilo que estrebucho e não possuo."
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Dispersão, Paris, maio 1913)

E3.4.1_REF5.2_PO "DISPERSION
I lost myself within myself
Because I was a labyrinth, And
today, when I feel myself, 
It is with longing for myself.

I went through my life 
A crazy star dreaming. 
In my eagerness to surpass, 
I didn't even notice my life...

For me, it's always yesterday, 
I have no tomorrow or today: 
The time that escapes others 
Falls on me like yesterday.
[...]
As one cries for a lover, 
So I cry for myself: 
I was a fickle lover 
Who betrayed himself.

I don't feel the space I enclose 
Nor the lines I project:
If I look in the mirror, I miss myself - 
I don't find myself in what I project.
[...]
Twilight descended upon my soul; 
I was someone who passed by. 
I will be, but I am no longer; 
I don't live, I sleep in twilight.
[...]
I have lost death and life,
And, mad, I do not go mad...
The hour flees, lived,
I follow it, but remain behind...
[...]"
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Dispersion, Paris, May 1913)



"DISPERSÃO

Perdi-me dentro de mim 
Porque eu era labirinto, E
 hoje, quando me sinto, 
É com saudades de mim.

Passei pela minha vida 
Um astro doido a sonhar. 
Na ansia de ultrapassar, 
Nem dei pela minha vida...

Para mim é sempre ontem, 
Não tenho amanhã nem hoje: 
O tempo que aos outros foge 
Cai sobre mim feito ontem.

[...]

Como se chora um amante, 
Assim me choro a mim mesmo: 
Eu fui amante inconstante 
Que se traiu a si mesmo.

Não sinto o espaço que encerro 
Nem as linhas que projecto:
Se me olho a um espelho, érro - 
Não me acho no que projecto.

[...]

Desceu-me n'alma o crepusculo; 
Eu fui alguem que passou. 
Serei, mas já não me sou; 
Não vivo, durmo o crepusculo.

[...]

Perdi a morte e a vida, 
E, louco, não enlouqueço... 
A hora foge vivida, 
Eu sigo-a, mas permaneço...

[...]"
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Dispersão, Paris, maio 1913)

E3.4.1_REF5.3_PO "QUASI
A little more sun—I would have been embers, 
A little more blue—I would have been beyond. 
To reach it, I lacked a stroke of the wing... 
If only I had remained behind...
[...]
Almost love, almost triumph and flame, 
Almost the beginning and the end—almost expansion... 
But in my soul everything spills out... 
Thus, nothing happened just illusion!

There was a beginning to everything... and everything went wrong...
-Oh, the pain of being almost there, endless pain... -
I failed among others, I failed towards myself,
A wing that stretched out but did not fly...

Moments of the soul that I squandered...
Temples where I never placed an altar...
Rivers that I lost without leading them to the sea...
Desires that I had but did not acknowledged...

If I wander, I find only clues... 
Warheads for the sun—I see them closed; 
And heroes' hands, coward and without faith,
Put bars on the precipices...

In a diffuse rush of brokenness, 
I started everything and possessed nothing... 
Today, all that remains of me is the disenchantment 
Of things I kissed but did not live...

A little more sun - and it would have been embers, 
A little more blue - and it would have been beyond. 
To reach it, I lacked a stroke of the wing... 
If only I had remained behind..."
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Dispersion, Paris, May 1913)



"QUASI

Um pouco mais de sol-eu era brasa, 
Um pouco mais de asul - eu era alem. 
Para atingir, faltou-me um golpe d'asa... 
Se ao menos eu permanecesse aquem...

[...]

Quasi o amor, quasi o triunfo e a chama, 
Quasi o principio e o fim-quasi a expansão... 
Mas na minh'alma tudo se derrama... 
Emtanto nada foi só ilusão!

De tudo houve um começo... e tudo errou... 
-Ai a dôr de ser-quasi, dôr sem fim... - 
Eu falhei-me entre os mais, falhei em mim, 
Asa que se elançou mas não voou...

Momentos d'alma que desbaratei... 
Templos aonde nunca pus um altar... 
Rios que perdi sem os levar ao mar...
Ansias que foram mas que não fixei...

Se me vagueio, encontro só indicios... 
Ogivas para o sol-vejo-as cerradas; 
E mãos d'heroi, sem fé, acobardadas, 
Puseram grades sobre os precipicios...

Num impeto difuso de quebranto, 
Tudo encetei e nada possuí... 
Hoje, de mim, só resta o desencanto 
Das coisas que beijei mas não vivi...

Um pouco mais de sol - e fôra brasa, 
Um pouco mais de asul - e fôra alem. 
Para atingir, faltou-me um golpe d'asa... 
Se ao menos eu permanecesse aquem..."
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Dispersão, Paris, maio 1913)

E3.4.1_REF5.4_PO "TACITURN

There is gold inlaid in me, rare stones, 
Sinister gold in medieval bronze tunes - 
My soul is a deep jewel with expensive lights, 
A triangular baldachin of infernal rites.

In my inner world, armors are clenched
Iron helmets crush princesses.
An entire royal lineage of heroes of other braveries
In me, stripped themselves of their coats of arms and fangs.

Heraldry - moonlight on crimson waves,
Humiliations to the lily, brocade clashes;
Basilicas of boredom, crisped harnesses,
Insignia of Illusion, jasper trophies and October...

The dull drawbridge of I-have-been
Rusted in vain trying to descend...
Over moats of Vago, battlements of still-want-to-
Mornings of weapons still in camps of oblivion...
 

I wander through halls without windows or doors, 
Long throne rooms of thick densities, 
Where the Arras cloths are frayed with longing,
And the divans, in a circle, weary, absorbed with yearning...

There are purple ends of an Empire in my renunciation - 
Satin whims of my Astral disdain... 
There are funerals of heroes in my feudal pain -
And my remorse forms terraces over the Sea..."
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Traces of Gold, Paris, August 1914)



"TACITURNO

Ha Oiro marchetado em mim, a pedras raras, 
Oiro sinistro em sons de bronzes medievais  - 
Joia profunda a minha Alma a luzes caras, 
Cibório (1) triangular de ritos infernais.

No meu mundo interior cerraram-se armaduras 
Capacetes de ferro esmagaram Princesas. 
Toda uma estirpe real de herois d'Outras bravuras 
Em Mim se e despojou dos seus brazões e presas.

Heraldicas (2) -luar sobre impetos de rubro, 
Humilhações a liz, desforços (3) de brocado; 
Bazilicas de tédio, arnezes de crispado, 
Insignias de Ilusão, troféus de jaspe (4) e Outubro...

A ponte levadiça e baça (5) de Eu-ter-sido 
Enferrujou-embalde (6) a tentarão descer...
Sobre fossos de Vago, ameias (7) de inda-quere r- 
Manhãs de armas ainda em arraiais de olvido (8)... 

Percorro-me em salões sem janelas nem portas, 
Longas salas de trôno a espessas densidades, 
Onde os pânos de Arrás são esgarçadas (9) saudades,
E os divans, em redór, ansias lassas, absortas (10) ...

Ha rôxos fins d'Imperio em meu renunciar - 
Caprichos de setim do meu desdem Astral... 
Ha exéquias (11) de herois na minha dor feudal -
E os meus remorsos são terraços sobre o Mar..."
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Indícios de Oiro, Paris, agosto 1914)

Anotações:
(1) Baldaquino
(2) Brasão 
(3) Violenvcia
(4) Rocha
(5) Palida
(6) Em vâo
(7) "crénaux"
(8) Esquecimento
(9) Rasgadas
(10) Absorvidas
(11) Funerais

E3.4.1_REF5.5_PO "APOTHEOSIS

Broken masts, I sail on a sea of gold
Sleeping fire, uncertain, longingly... 
Everything became equal to me in a close dream, 
And today I live only in half of myself...

They are bronze sorrows that I still cry 
Dead pilasters, marble in the west...
My anxieties have turned white
For false cloisters where I never pray...

I desembarked from Myself. I folded the mantle of Astro,
I broke the crystal cup and amazement, 
I carved the Gold of my trail into shadow...

I ended... Platinum hours... Brocade scent... 
Moonlight longing... Forgiving light... Tears of Orchid...

- O swamps of Me - stagnant garden..."
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Traces of Gold, Paris, June 1914)



"APOTEOSE

Mastros quebrados, singro num mar d'Ouro
Dormindo fogo, incerto, longemente... 
Tudo se me igualou num sonho rente, 
E em metade de mim hoje só moro...

São tristezas de bronze as que inda chóro 
Pilastras mortas, marmores ao Poente... 
Lagearam-se-me as Ansias brancamente 
Por claustros falsos onde nunca óro...

Desci de Mim. Dobrei o manto d'Astro,
Quebrei a taça de cristal e espanto, 
Talhei em sombra o Oiro do meu rastro...

Findei... Horas-platina... Olor-brocado... 
Luar-ansia... Luz-perdão... Orquideas-pranto...

 - Ó pantanos de Mim - jardim estagnado..."
(Mário de Sá-Carneiro, Indícios de Oiro, Paris, junho 1914)

E3.4.1_REF6_PH  I_Rob Hunter_llustration from A Graphic Cosmogony

EMERSON DESCRIBES THE "STATIC, PAST SELF" AS THE "INERT EFFORT OF EACH THOUGHT" WHICH TRIES TO "SOLIDIFY AND HEM IN THE LIFE."
"The key to every man is his thought. Sturdy and defying though he look, he has a helm which he obeys, which is the idea after which all his facts are classified. He can only be reformed by showing him a new idea which commands his own. The life of man is a self-evolving circle, which, from a ring imperceptibly small, rushes on all sides outwards to new and larger circles, and that without end. The extent to which this generation of circles, wheel without wheel, will go, depends on the force or truth of the individual soul. For it is the inert effort of each thought, having formed itself into a circular wave of circumstance … to heap itself on that ridge, and to solidify and hem in the life. But if the soul is quick and strong, it bursts over that boundary on all sides, and expands another orbit on the great deep, which also runs up into a high wave, with attempt again to stop and to bind. But the heart refuses to be imprisoned; in its first and narrowest pulses, it already tends outward with a vast force, and to immense and innumerable expansions. [...]

Every ultimate fact is only the first of a new series… The new statement is always hated by the old, and, to those dwelling in the old, comes like an abyss of skepticism. […]

In nature every moment is new; the past is always swallowed and forgotten… Nothing is secure but life, transition, the energizing spirit. No love can be bound by oath or covenant to secure it against a higher love. No truth so sublime but it may be trivial to-morrow in the light of new thoughts. People wish to be settled; only as far as they are unsettled is there any hope for them.

Life is a series of surprises."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Circles, 1841 - Essays and Lectures)

E3.4.1_REF6.1_PH I_Oliver Jeffers_Art from Once Upon an Alphabet, Short Stories for All the Letters - Letter O

EMERSON CONTRASTS "TALENTS" (REPEATING THE OLD) WITH "CHARACTER" (THE POWER TO "MAKE A NEW ROAD" AND "DRAW A NEW CIRCLE").
"The difference between talents and character is adroitness to keep the old and trodden round, and power and courage to make a new road to new and better goals. Character makes an overpowering present; a cheerful, determined hour, which fortifies all the company, by making them see that much is possible and excellent that was not thought of. Character dulls the impression of particular events. When we see the conqueror, we do not think much of any one battle or success… The great man is not convulsible or tormentable; events pass over him without much impression. People say sometimes, ‘See what I have overcome; see how cheerful I am; see how completely I have triumphed over these black events.’ Not if they still remind me of the black event. True conquest is the causing the calamity to fade and disappear, as an early cloud of insignificant result in a history so large and advancing. [...]

The one thing which we seek with insatiable desire is to forget ourselves, to be surprised out of our propriety, to lose our sempiternal memory, and to do something without knowing how or why; in short, to draw a new circle. Nothing great was ever achieved without enthusiasm. The way of life is wonderful: it is by abandonment. The great moments of history are the facilities of performance through the strength of ideas… They ask the aid of wild passions… to ape in some manner these flames and generosities of the heart."
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, Circles, 1841 - Essays and Lectures)

E3.4.2. The Rupture: Stripping the Ego and Facing the "Void".
The painful process of shedding the old self: the fear, panic, and disorientation that occur when the static armor is removed, and the initial perception of this new state as a terrifying void or nothingness.

E3.4.2_REF1_PH BEGINNING WELL MEANS SEATING OURSELVES IN THE BODY AGAIN, CATCHING UP WITH OURSELVES AND THE PERSON WE HAVE BECOME SINCE WE LAST TRIED TO BEGIN
"BEGINNING

well or beginning poorly, what is important is simply to begin, but the ability to make a good beginning is also an art form. Like picking up a new and unfamiliar musical instrument, the first necessary step involves taking the time to get a simple clear note, usually the simple clear note of forgiveness that comes in allowing yourself the right, at this stage, not to know anything at all. Beginning anything well involves a clearing away of the confusing, the cluttered and the complicated to find the beautiful, often hidden lineaments of the essential and the necessary.

Beginning is difficult, and our insulating rituals and the virtuoso subtleties of our methods of delay are always a fine, ever-present measure of our reluctance in taking that first close-in, courageous step to reclaiming the happiness of actually having started. Perhaps, because taking a new step always begins from the central, foundational core of the body, a body we have neglected, beginning well means seating ourselves in the body again, catching up with ourselves and the person we have become since we last tried to begin. This radical physical embodiment leads to an equally radical internal simplification, where, suddenly, very large parts of us, parts of us we have kept gainfully employed for years, parts of us still rehearsing the old complicated story, are suddenly out of a job.

There occurs, in effect, a form of internal corporate downsizing, where the parts of us too afraid to participate or having nothing now to offer, are let go, with all of the accompanying death-like trauma, and where the very last fight occurs, a rear-guard disbelief that this new, less complicated self, and this very simple step, is all that is needed for the new possibilities ahead.

It is always hard to believe that the courageous step is so close to us, that it is closer than we ever could imagine, that in fact we already know what it is, and that the step is simpler, more radical than we had thought: just picking up the pen or the wood chisel, just picking up the instrument or the phone, which is why we so often prefer the story to be more elaborate, our identities to be safely clouded by fear, why we want the horizon to remain always in the distance, the promise never fully and simply made, the essay longer than it needs to be and the answer safely in the realm of impossibility."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E3.4.2_REF2_PH "SILENCE IS FRIGHTENING, AN INTIMATION OF THE END, THE GRAVEYARD OF FIXED IDENTITIES.Real silence puts any present understanding to shame; orphans us from certainty; leads us beyond the well-known and accepted reality and confronts us with the unknown and previously unacceptable conversation about to break in upon our lives."
(David Whyte, Consolations: The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words)

E1.5.D.1.3.d.i.wE3.4.2.

"I KNOW, I GIVE UP EVERYTHING, I DON'T GIVE UP MY “SELF”. IT'S THE CONTRARY OF WHAT I SHOULD BE DOING. [...]
This "I" should renounce, it should abdicate. One should let oneself go. "I" is prevented from letting go; desires arise despite myself, an anxious "me" stands against the serene "me", in which "me" am I? I want to know. I am driven to know. I can't help but desire to know. I am not the master of my desires or my sadness or my anxiety. Or, my anxieties, my nostalgias, my distresses are a self refusing to be serene. Is my anxiety another’s, is my anxiety myself? [...]
I declare that knowledge is useless. I declare that the sciences do not penetrate the essence of being. I don't care about not knowing anything because knowledge is "worldly". The worldly does not interest me: it is what is done, it is what is made, it is what moves. The mechanism of restlessness does not interest me: what is behind, it's Him or It, the Unknown which is alone worthy of our interest. Not science, knowledge. Knowledge is impossible. But I can't resign myself to only knowing the walls of the prison."
(Eugène Ionesco, Journal en miettes [Diary in shreds], 1967)

E3.4.2_REF3_PO "THAT SHADOW MY LIKENESS
That shadow my likeness that goes to and fro seeking a livelihood, chattering, chaffering,
How often I find myself standing and looking at it where it flits,
How often I question and doubt whether that is really me;
But among my lovers and caroling these songs,
O I never doubt whether that is really me."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E3.4.2_REF4_PO "THE NAME 

I start to doze off during the trip and park 
my car under the trees by the side of the road. I curl up in 
the back seat and sleep. For how long? Hours. 
Night has fallen.
 

Suddenly, I wake up and don't recognize myself. Fully 
awake, but it's no use. Where am I? WHO am I? 
I am this thing that wakes up in the back seat, in the grip of 
panic, struggling like a cat in a bag. Who? 

Finally, my life comes back to me. My name comes back like an angel.
Beyond the walls, we hear the bugle sounding (as 
in the Overture to Eleonora), and saving footsteps descend 
quickly, quickly from the top of a staircase that is far too long. It's me!
It's me!

Yet it is impossible to forget those fifteen seconds of struggle 
in the hell of oblivion, a few meters from the highway 
where traffic glides by, all lights on."
(Tomas Tranströmer, Night Visions - Mörkerseende, 1970)

E3.4.2_REF5_PH TO GROW, WE MUST BECOME STRANGERS TO WHO WE WERE FOR "PRIORITIES AND PASSIONS HAVE CHANGED". THIS IS NOT A BETRAYAL, BUT A LIBERATION FROM THE EGO."Moving through the stages of life and meeting each on its own terms is the supreme art of living — the ultimate test of self-respect and self-love. Often, what most blunts our vitality is the tendency for the momentum of a past stage to steer the present one, even though our priorities and passions have changed beyond recognition."
(Maria Popova, The marginalian)

"We’re often led to believe that getting older is in itself somehow a betrayal of our idealistic younger self, but sometimes I think it might be the other way around. Maybe the younger self finds it difficult to inhabit its true potential because it has no idea what that potential is. It is a kind of unformed thing running scared most of the time, frantically trying to build its sense of self — This is me! Here I am! — in any way that it can. But then time and life come along, and smash that sense of self into a million pieces.

Then comes the reassembled self, the self you have to put back together. You no longer have to devote time to finding out what you are, you are just free to be whatever you want to be, unimpeded by the incessant needs of others. You somehow grow into the fullness of your humanity, form your own character, become a proper person — I don’t know, someone who has become a part of things, not someone separated from or at odds with the world."
(Nick Cave,  Faith, Hope and Carnage, 2022)

E3.4.2_REF6_LIT A_Ego lacks of unity_2015_Venice Biennale_(1) ; A_Ego lacks of unity_2015_Venice Biennale_(2)

THE "SUDDEN LIGHT" OF SELF-AWARENESS "CONSUMES EVERYTHING" AND LEAVES US "NAKED EVEN OF OURSELVES"
"Suddenly, as if destiny had turned surgeon and, with dramatic success, operated on an ancient blindness, I raise my eyes from my anonymous life to the clear knowledge of the manner of my existence. And I see that everything I have done, everything I have thought, everything I have been, is a sort of delusion and madness. I marvel that I did not see it before. I am surprised by everything I have been and that I now see I am not.
I look down on my past life as if it were a plain stretched out beneath the sun just breaking through the clouds, and I notice, with a metaphysical shock, how all my most assured gestures, my clearest ideas and my most logical aims were, after all, nothing but an innate drunkenness, a natural madness, an immense ignorance. I did not act the part. It acted me. I was merely the gestures, never the actor.
Everything that I have done, thought and been has been a series of subordinations either to a false entity I took to be myself, because all my actions came from him, or to the force of circumstance that I took to be the air I breathed. In this visionary moment, I am suddenly a solitary man realizing he is in exile from the country of which he had always considered himself a citizen. In the very heart of everything I thought, I was not me.
I am overwhelmed by a sarcastic terror of life, a dejection that overflows the bounds of my conscious being. I know that I was never anything but error and mistake, that I never lived, that I existed only in the sense that I filled up time with consciousness and thought. And my sense of myself is that of a person waking up after a sleep full of real dreams, or like someone freed by an earthquake from the feeble light of the prison to which he had become accustomed.
It weighs on me, this sudden notion of the true nature of my individual being that did nothing but make somnolent journeys between what was felt and what was seen, it weighs on me as if it were a sentence not to death but to knowledge.
It is so difficult to describe the feeling one has when one feels that one really does exist and that the soul is a real entity, that I do not know what human words I can use to define it. I don’t know if I’m really as feverish as I feel or if instead I have finally recovered from the fever of slumbering through life. Yes, I am like a traveler who suddenly finds himself in a strange town with no idea of how he got there, and I’m reminded of cases of amnesiacs, who, losing all memory of their past lives, for a long time live as other people. For many years — from the time I was born and became a conscious being — I too was someone else and now I wake up suddenly to find myself standing in the middle of the bridge, looking out over the river, knowing more positively now than at any moment before that I exist. But I do not know the city, the streets are new to me and the sickness incurable. So, leaning on the bridge, I wait for the truth to pass so that I can regain my null and fictitious, intelligent and natural self.
It lasted only a moment and has passed now. I notice the furniture around me, the design on the old wallpaper, the sun through the dusty panes. For a moment I saw the truth. For a moment I was, consciously, what great men are throughout their lives. I recall their actions and their words and I wonder if they too were tempted by and succumbed to the Demon Reality. To know nothing about oneself is to live. To know a little about oneself is to think. To know oneself precipitately, as I did in that moment of pure enlightenment, is suddenly to grasp Leibniz’s notion of the dominant monad, the magic password to the soul. A sudden light scorches and consumes everything. It strips us naked even of our selves.
It was only a moment, but I saw myself. Now I cannot even say what I was. And, after it all, I just feel sleepy because, though I don’t really know why, I suspect that the meaning of it all is simply to sleep."
(Fernando Pessoa, The book of disquiet, 1914)

E3.4.3. Reframing the Stranger: "I Am Not Empty, I Am Open".
Redefining the "void" as a space of pure potential, receptivity, and transparency shifts the definition of "Self" from a noun (substance/image) to a verb (action/opening).

E3.4.3_REF1_PSI THE THREE ELEMENTS OF THE GOOD LIFE

“[Our necessary illusions are] a form of defensiveness — they help us bear the disillusionments difficult to bear: that we are invulnerable, immortal, congruent with our self-image — and yet they render us captives of the dream of ourselves, unfree to live the reality of our own complexity.

‘If a person could be fully open to his experience, however, every stimulus — whether originating within the organism or in the environment — would be freely relayed through the nervous system without being distorted by any defensive mechanism. There would be no need of the mechanism of “subception” whereby the organism is forewarned of any experience threatening to the self. On the contrary, whether the stimulus was the impact of a configuration of form, color, or sound in the environment on the sensory nerves, or a memory trace from the past, or a visceral sensation of fear or pleasure or disgust, the person would be “living” it, would have it completely available to awareness.’
The reward of this willingness to be fully aware is profound self-trust:
’The individual is becoming more able to listen to himself, to experience what is going on within himself. He is more open to his feelings of fear and discouragement and pain. He is also more open to his feelings of courage, and tenderness, and awe. He is free to live his feelings subjectively, as they exist in him, and also free to be aware of these feelings. He is more able fully to live the experiences of his organism rather than shutting them out of awareness.’

Out of this ‘movement away from the pole of defensiveness toward the pole of openness to experience’ arises the second element of the good life: ‘an increasing tendency to live fully in each moment’ and discover the nature of experience in the process of living the experience rather than in your predictive models, which are only ever based on the past. When you are fully open to your experience, Rogers observes, each moment is entirely new — a ‘complex configuration of inner and outer stimuli’ that has never before existed and will never again exist in that exact form, which means that who you will be in the next moment will also be entirely new and cannot be predicted by you or anyone else — that lovely freedom of breaking the template of yourself and the prison of your story. Rogers writes:

‘One way of expressing the fluidity which is present in such existential living is to say that the self and personality emerge *from* experience, rather than experience being translated or twisted to fit preconceived self-structure. It means that one becomes a participant in and an observer of the ongoing process of organismic experience, rather than being in control of it.

Such living in the moment means an absence of rigidity, of tight organization, of the imposition of structure on experience. It means instead a maximum of adaptability, a discovery of structure in experience, a flowing, changing organization of self and personality. […]

Most of us, on the other hand, bring a preformed structure and evaluation to our experience and never relinquish it, but cram and twist the experience to fit our preconceptions, annoyed at the fluid qualities which make it so unruly in fitting our carefully constructed pigeonholes.’

By discovering experience in the process of living it, we arrive at the third element of the good life — a growing ability to trust ourselves to discover the right course of action in any situation. Most of us, Rogers observes, consciously or unconsciously rely on external guiding principles in navigating life — a code of conduct laid down by our culture, our parents, our peers, our own past choices. He writes:

‘The person who is fully open to his experience would have access to all of the available data in the situation, on which to base his behavior; the social demands, his own complex and possibly conflicting needs, his memories of similar situations, his perception of the uniqueness of this situation, etc., etc. The data would be very complex indeed. But he could permit his total organism, his consciousness participating, to consider each stimulus, need, and demand, its relative intensity and importance, and out of this complex weighing and balancing, discover that course of action which would come closest to satisfying all his needs in the situation.’
What makes this process most vulnerable to error is our continual tendency to lens the present through the past:

‘The defects which in most of us make this process untrustworthy are the inclusion of information which does *not* belong to this present situation, or the exclusion of information which does. It is when memories and previous learnings are fed into the computations as if they were this reality, and not memories and learnings, that erroneous behavioral answers arise.’

Rogers paints a portrait of the person who has braided these three strands of the good life:

‘The person who is psychologically free… is more able to live fully in and with each and all of his feelings and reactions. He  makes increasing use of all his organic equipment to sense, as accurately as possible, the existential situation within and without. He makes use of all of the information his nervous system can thus supply, using it in awareness, but recognizing that his total organism may be, and often is, wiser than his awareness. He is more able to permit his total organism to function freely in all its complexity in selecting, from the multitude of possibilities, that behavior which in this moment of time will be most generally and genuinely satisfying. He is able to put more trust in his organism in this functioning, not because it is infallible, but because he can be fully open to the consequences of each of his actions and correct them if they prove to be less than satisfying.

He is more able to experience all of his feelings, and is less afraid of any of his feelings; he is his own sifter of evidence, and is more open to evidence from all sources; he is completely engaged in the process of being and becoming himself.’”
(Maria Popova’s review of Carl R. Rogers’s On becoming a person, 1961 - in The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/10/05/carl-rogers-good-life/?mc_cid=27e4c68167&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E3.4.3_REF2_PH JEAN-LUC GIRIBONE LIKENS SPIRITUAL PRACTICE TO A "TOPOLOGICAL REVOLUTION", WHERE THE SEEKER DETACHES FROM THE HEAVY EGO TO RELOCATE THEIR IDENTITY IN AN "UPSTREAM I", discovering a stable internal anchor that allows them to fully inhabit their existence while paradoxically perceiving themselves as "almost nothing."
"A TERRITORY CALLED ‘I’ [...]
THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF INTERIORITY
The researcher's view of himself is not entirely psychological; it is more of an anthropology of interiority. It differs from egotism in that there is no self-admiration. Rather than cultivating one's uniqueness as a treasure only one possesses, it "simply" attempts to change one's inner position. Why? Above all, to suffer less. Lacan said that "wanting to know oneself" was a poor reason to undergo analysis. "It speaks where it hurts," he wrote. However, the spiritual seeker adds his curiosity, intensified by his practice, for the inner workings of humanity. In other words, each of us is a bearer of the human condition, as Montaigne says.
The spiritual seeker then sees more clearly what distinguishes spiritual seeking from psychotherapy or psychoanalysis. For him, it is not a matter of understanding a symptom or overcoming a disorder. Rather, it is a matter of studying the problem of life endlessly, considering it repeatedly without expecting to escape this study, connecting with this problem, and creating a space that allows us to see and experience life differently. This space enables us to navigate the vicissitudes and uncertainties of existence and provides an observation post that leads to less blindness. "Enjoying life" ceases to be an imperative as banal as it is impossible to achieve, and spirituality appears as the experience through which this enjoyment, finally possible, detaches itself from the diversity of events to blossom as an autonomous register.

REVOLUTION INWARD
The seeker then reaches an inner place described by a sutra as "the refuge of salvation." There, the four essential questions arise: Where do I come from? Where am I going? Where am I? What am I?" —become unified. They "appear," writes Suzuki, "as one and the same, differently stated." Neglecting the first two for the moment, which belong to what we in the West call "metaphysics," let us focus on the last two. "Where am I?" and "What am I?" are two ways of asking the same question. Spiritual practice offers me a place to live and encourages me to become fully myself. It is this inner position that we must reach. "Practicing" involves understanding and constructing this position, including through the body, in order to make it our refuge.

Despite the differences mentioned, we can better grasp the nature of this change by referring to psychoanalysis as reformulated by Lacan. In both cases, it is not simply a matter of changing the profile of the self or its psychological content—i.e., acquiring or losing qualities—but rather, saying "I" in another place. This only happens when the ego no longer monopolizes one's speech and vision. Admittedly, the revolution brought about by spiritual research, like that induced by psychoanalysis, has psychological and, ultimately, behavioral consequences. However, it is, above all, topological—the inner space is transformed, greatly affecting the seeker's perception of himself. Strangely, they experience two feelings simultaneously: having given the word "I" its full value and being nothing or almost nothing—a straw, a Shakespearean "not much," "woven from the stuff that dreams are made of." During my psychoanalysis, I felt as if I no longer had a shadow. As my ego loosened its grip, my reflection faded away. To paraphrase Cocteau, the mirrors began to reflect before returning my image. Spiritual seeking is also a learning process, but in a completely different way. In this process, the heavy characteristics of the ego appear derisory, and the self detaches from the seeker without disappearing. All that remains for the seeker is a pronoun that designates him or her, but this pronoun suddenly becomes absolutely personal. Individual particularity is not abolished in some kind of fusion with the "Great Whole"; rather, it is reestablished and transposed to a place other than the self. It is there, in this upstream self, that the seeker finds his footing—or, to use an equestrian term, his seat for riding through existence"
(Jean-Luc Giribone, Beyond Wisdom, How to Live?, 2023)


E3.4.3_REF3_PO A_Johannes Vermeer_The Music Lesson_circa 1662-1665 ; A_Johannes Vermeer_Woman in blue, reading a letter_circa 1662-65 / Johannes Vermeer/

THE VOID REPLIES: "I AM NOT EMPTY, I AM OPEN”

"VERMEER [...]
Passing through the wall into the dazzling studio
at the moment that has been allowed to last for centuries.
Canvases entitled The Music Lesson
or Woman in Blue Reading a Letter—
she is eight months pregnant, two hearts beating within her.
Behind her, on the wall, hangs a crumpled map of Terra
Incógnita.
Breathe calmly... A mysterious blue material has been
nailed to the seats.
The golden rivets flew in at incredible speed,
then stopped abruptly,
as if they had always been at rest.
Ears ring from the depth or altitude.
It is the pressure coming from the other side of the wall
that causes realities to dissolve
and steadies the brush.
Passing through walls is painful, it makes you sick
but it is essential.
The world is one. As for walls...
And walls are a part of you—
we know it or we don't, but it's the same for everyone,
except little children. For them, there are no walls.
The bright sky bows against the wall.
It is like a prayer addressed to the void.
And the void turns its face toward us
and whispers:
“I am not empty, I am open.”
(Tomas Tranströmer, Prison, 1959)


"VERMEER [...]

Passer au travers du mur dans l’atelier éclatant 
à la seconde qu’on a autorisée à durer des siècles. 
Des toiles qui s’intitulent la Leçon de musique 
Ou Femme en bleu lisant une lettre -
elle en est au huitième mois, deux cœurs s’agitent en elle. 
Derrière, sur le mur, pend une carte froissée de la Terra 
 Incógnita. 

Respirer avec calme… Une mystérieuse matière bleue a été 
 clouée aux sièges.
Les rivets dorés sont entrés au vol, à une vitesse inouïe,
pour s’arrêter net, 
comme s’ils avaient toujours été au repos. 

Les oreilles bourdonnent à force de profondeur ou d’altitude. 
C’est la pression venue de l’autre côté du mur
qui amène les réalités à se dissoudre 
et affermit le pinceau. 

Passer les murs est une chose douloureuse, on en tombe 
malade mais c’est indispensable. 
Le monde est un. Quant aux murs… 
Et les murs sont une part de toi -
on le sait ou on l’ignore, mais c’est ainsi pour tout le monde, 
sauf les petits enfants. Pour eux, pas de murs. 

Le ciel éclatant s’incline contre la muraille. 
C’est comme une prière qu’on adresse au vide.
Et le vide tourne son visage vers nous 
et murmure : 
« Je ne suis pas vide, je suis ouvert. »" 
(Tomas Tranströmer, Prison, 1959)

E3.4.3_REF4_PO TO BE A PERSON MAY BE POSSIBLE THEN, AFTER ALL.
OR THE QUESTION MAY BE CONSIDERED STILL AT LEAST OPEN —
AN UNUSED DRAWER, A PAIR OF WAITING WORKBOOTS.

"TO BE A PERSON
To be a person is an untenable proposition.

Odd of proportion,
upright,
unbalanced of body, feeling, and mind.

Two predator’s eyes
face forward,
yet seem always to be trying to look back.

Unhooved, untaloned fingers
seem to grasp mostly grief and pain.
To create, too often, mostly grief and pain.

Some take,
in witnessed suffering, pleasure.
Some make, of witnessed suffering, beauty.

On the other side —
a creature capable of blushing,
who chooses to spin until dizzy,
likes what is shiny,
demands to stay awake even when sleepy.

Learns what is basic, what acid,
what are stomata, nuclei, jokes,
which birds are flightless.
Learns to play four-handed piano.
To play, when it is needed, one-handed piano.

Hums. Feeds strays.
Says, “All together now, on three.”

To be a person may be possible then, after all.

Or the question may be considered still at least open —
an unused drawer, a pair of waiting workboots."
(Jane Hirshfield, The Asking: New and Selected Poems)

Listen to it on YouTube: https://youtu.be/y_z4WZfmqtE?si=-JgcPU-bKSQTlErt

E3.4.3_REF5_PH I_David Ha_I think therefore I am

DESCARTES' DISCOURSE ON METHOD: I THINK, THEREFORE I AM?
"In this work, he anticipates the Meditations he would write five years later. Through this method, we can convince ourselves that what we know is certain. However, Descartes experiments with dreams and the experience of error, showing that we are mistaken in thinking that we are always right. Therefore, we are not defined by what we know. The same is true of our bodies when we are ill and hospital staff take over. The subject, who is supposed to know, is different from what he knows. What we can know may be nothing more than a dream. Unlike Galileo, who took refuge in the mathematical certainty of his interpretation of the world, Descartes tackles this problem head on. For Descartes, this does not mean that we have touched the absolute. What I understand, being a product of my own making, cannot guarantee any absolute truth. This is where the cogito comes in: even if what I think is false, thinking is required for falsehood to exist. I exist insofar as I am a thinking being (whether my thoughts are false or true).
"I think, therefore I am" is a performative statement that does what it says by saying it. One cannot say "I think" without thinking; therefore, it is an act. As Descartes uses "therefore," we can imagine the conclusion of a syllogism: Everything that thinks is; I think; therefore, I am.
Yet, in the second meditation, he writes that the formula "I am, I exist" is necessarily true whenever one thinks or says it. The words "therefore" and "think" are not present because if thinking is an act, it is implied, as in "I dance," therefore "I think I dance." Richard Mittens rightly said that Descartes could have written, "I am not, therefore I exist," because the content of thinking is irrelevant.
Thinking is an act. However, Descartes derives the existence of an "I" that thinks from this, which is debatable, as Bertrand Russell points out. In Discourse on Method, he writes that the "I" is a substance; however, in the Meditations, he reserves the term "substance" for God. The ego as a substance does not represent Descartes's mature thinking: "I am" only as long as "I think." The ego disappears with the end of the act of thinking. Therefore, I am not in duration. The ego is not the mind. There is an empirical ego, the "subject" of the act, about which little can be said. When this ego becomes aware that it is thinking, it takes on another role that Kant calls the transcendental ego: an abstract, universal ego beyond all substance. We exist when we are conscious and present to ourselves, which is the opposite of artificial intelligence. Existence is singularity; it is fully committing to what one says. In contrast, Montaigne had everything "necessary" to pronounce the cogito but believed that committing oneself as "I" to the ego was impossible."
(Jean-Luc Mario in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on January 30, 2019)

E3.4.3_REF6_PH THE TRUE PRESENCE OF ONESELF TO ONESELF:
"This is why jubilantly accepting oneself necessarily implies renouncing the spectacle of one's own image. Here, the image kills the model. The fatal error of narcissism is not loving oneself excessively, but rather, when choosing between oneself and one's double, giving preference to the image. The narcissist suffers from not loving himself; he only loves his representation. True love of oneself implies indifference to all one's copies, as they appear to others, and to myself through them, if I pay too much attention to them. [...]
The original must do without any image. If I cannot find myself within myself, I will find myself even less in my echo. Therefore, the self must suffice, however meager it may seem or be, because the choice is limited to the unique, which is very little, and its double, which is nothing. This idea is beautifully expressed in everyday language when it declares, without much thought, that "you can't change who you are."
(Clément Rosset, The Real and Its Double)

E3.4.3_REF7_PH "I 
The subject is in the first person and, as such, is distinct from the self. It is distinct from the self, which would be the subject as an object. This includes the "I": when I know myself or believe I know myself, the "me," as a Kantian would say, is the phenomenon of the "I," which knows but cannot be known. The "I" is elusive by nature (we can only grasp the "me," if at all) and rarely striking. The world or truth are more interesting, as are the you or the we. One might object that it is always an "I" that knows or loves. No doubt. This is what saves it by abolishing it—when nothing remains but truth or love. "Sin in me," writes Simone Weil in Gravity, and she adds, coming close to Vedanta here: "I am everything. But that 'I' is God. And it is not an 'I.'"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical dictionary, 2001)

E3.4.4. The Truer Self: Innocence, Play, and Eternal Becoming. This is the "dynamic, authentic" self.

E3.4.4_REF1_PH "Because you are struggling, your question begins to deepen… What you will discover, always for the first time, always new, in the fleeting moment of wonder — before that moment is captured by the ambitions of personality. You, I, in that moment, will discover the need to serve the energy, uniquely human and also sacred, that starts as the pure awareness of one’s own existence. And even as this idea — this beginning idea — of what is human, even as this idea of what is man, begins to appear — even in that fleeting moment of the pure awareness of my existence given now by a great idea — in that moment in front of a living idea, an awakening idea, a glimpse appears of the uniquely human yearning to serve; the need appears, the need to obey that energy, the need to attend to it, to be nourished by it, to receive the help that comes then and only then, when you are objectively obliged to give, to serve, to manifest that energy in action and understanding. It is only that energy of conscious existence that gives you, a human being, real strength. The energy that is the total awareness of one’s own existence is — or can become, can be — the strongest energy in human life."
(Jacob Needleman, I Am Not I, 2016)

"Acknowledging the illusoriness of free will liberates us rather than tak[e] away our freedom. Pointing out how impossible it is to understand freedom without understanding the influences acting upon us, the laws of the universe, and the nature of reality, [Needleman] considers the source of real freedom"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

"Ask yourself what is your understanding of the influences acting upon us — of the universal laws in nature? What are your thoughts about that? And the teachings of religion — the idea of faith, obedience to the higher, responsibility for others and oneself, the deceptions and revelations of sleep and dreaming, the very idea of man’s place in the living, breathing, sentient cosmos, our place on our planet, the demand for morality, the nature of animal instinct and intuition within us and around us, the function and the meaning of pain and pleasure, the idea and the experience of consciousness and conscience, the subtle nourishment in the air we breathe, the food we eat, the genuine and the fabricated needs and desires of the body, the powerful influences of symbols, the cosmic and intimate force of sex, the inevitability of death, the illusion and the reality of time. […]

Working like this, and maintaining the fundamental attitude of sincerity about yourself and your discoveries, you will become disillusioned not only with your certainties, but with the structure of your mind itself. You will realize that what you need is not new beliefs, new information, new theories, but an entirely new mind. [...]

Real ideas open the mind to the heart, to the heart of the mind, to another level of reality within ourselves… This is the taste, the beginning, of inner freedom. Only fools imagine that freedom means getting what one happens to desire. Real freedom begins with obedience to a higher influence — a higher, finer energy within oneself. […]

What is higher in yourself? That way of thinking about the question is the beginning of the answer — because it involves a real idea which has been handed down to humanity over thousands of years… At such a point you yourself will find the answer — not as a thought, but as an experience.

You will for a moment become the answer! You will not only have a taste of real freedom; you will for a moment be freedom."
(Jacob Needleman, I Am Not I, 2016)

E3.4.4_REF2_PH  WHILE THE "LION" OF THE SPIRIT IS NECESSARY TO SAY A "HOLY NAY" AND CAPTURE FREEDOM FROM OLD VALUES, IT MUST THEN BECOME A "CHILD"—AN INNOCENT, "HOLY YEA"—TO AFFIRM LIFE AND ENGAGE IN THE "GAME OF CREATING" NEW VALUES.
"My brethren, wherefore is there need of the lion in the spirit? Why sufficeth not the beast of burden, which renounceth and is reverent? 

To create new values—that, even the lion cannot yet accomplish: but to create itself freedom for new creating—that can the might of the lion do.

To create itself freedom, and give a holy Nay even unto duty: for that, my brethren, there is need of the lion.

To assume the right to new values—that is the most formidable assumption for a load-bearing and reverent spirit. Verily, unto such a spirit it is preying, and the work of a beast of prey.

As its holiest, it once loved “Thou shalt”: now is it forced to find illusion and arbitrariness even in the holiest things, that it may capture freedom from its love: the lion is needed for this capture.

But tell me, my brethren, what the child can do, which even the lion could not do? Why hath the preying lion still to become a child?

Innocence is the child, and forgetfulness, a new beginning, a game, a self-rolling wheel, a first movement, a holy Yea.

Aye, for the game of creating, my brethren, there is needed a holy Yea unto life: ITS OWN will, willeth now the spirit; HIS OWN world winneth the world’s outcast."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Thus Spake Zarathustra, 1883)

E3.4.4_REF2.1_PH "To affirm is not to take responsibility for, to take on the burden of what is, but to release, to set free what lives. To affirm is to unburden: not to load life with the weight of higher values, but to create new values which are those of life, which make life light and active. There is creation, properly speaking, only insofar as we make use of excess in order to invent new forms of life rather than separating life from what it can do. "And you yourselves should create what you have hitherto called the World: the World should be formed in your image by your reason, your will and your love!" (ZII "On the Blissful Islands" p. 110). But this task is not completed in man. Going as far as he can man raises negation to a power of affirming. But affirming in its full power, affirming affirmation itself — this is beyond man's strength. "To create new values - even the lion is incapable of that: but to create itself freedom for new creation - that the lion can do"
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, 1962)

E3.4.4_REF3_PH "EXISTENCE AND INNOCENCE [...]
Heraclitus denied the duality of worlds, "he denied beingitself'. Moreover he made an affirmation ofbecoming. Wehaveto reflect for a long time to understand what it means to make an affirmation of becoming. In the first place it is doubtless to say that there is only becoming. No doubt it is also to affirm becoming. But we also affirm the being of becoming, we say that becoming affirms being or that being is affirmed in becoming. Heraclitus has two thoughts which are like ciphers: according to one there is no being, everything is becoming; according to the other, being is the being of becoming as such. A working thought which affirms becoming and a contempla­tive thought which affirms the being of becoming. These two ways of thinking are inseparable, they are the thought of a single element, as Fire and Dike, as Physis and Logos. For there is no being beyond becoming, nothing beyond multiplicity; neither multiplicity nor becoming are appearances or illusions. But neither are there multiple or eternal realities which would be, in turn, like essences beyond appearance. Multiplicity is the inseparable manifestation, essential transformation and constant symptom of unity. Multiplicity is the affirmation of unity; becoming is the affirmation of being. The affir­mation of becoming is itself being, the affirmation of multiplicity is itself one. Multiple affirmation is the way in which the one affirms itself. "The one is the many, unity is multiplicity." And indeed, how would multiplicity come forth from unity and how would it continue to come forth from it after an eternity of time if unity was not actually affirmed in multiplicity? "If Heraclitus only perceives a single ele­ment it is nevertheless, in a sense, diametrically opposed to that of Parmenides (or of Anaximander). . . The unique must be affirmed in generation and destruction." Heraclitus had taken a deep look, he had seen no chastisement of multiplicity, no expiation of becoming, no culpability of existence. He saw no negativity in becoming, he saw precisely the opposite: the double affirmation of becoming and of the being of becoming - in short the justification of being. Heraclitus is obscure because he leads us to the threshold of the obscure: what is the being of becoming? What is the being inseparable from that which is becoming? Return is the being of that which becomes. Return is the being of becoming itself, the being which is affirmed in becoming. The eternal return as law of becoming, as justice and as being.
It follows that existence is not responsible or even blameworthy. Heraclitus went as far as proclaiming "the struggle of the many is pure justice itself! In fact the one is the many!" (PTG 6 p. 57). The correlation of many and one, of becoming and being forms a game. Affirming becoming and affirming the being of becoming are the two moments of a game which are compounded with a third term, the player, the artist or the child. The player-artist-child, Zeus-child: Dionysus, who the myth presents to us surrounded by bis divine toys. The player temporarily abandons himself to life and temporarily fixes his gaze upon it; the artist places himself provisionally in his work and provisionally above it; the child plays, withdraws from the game and returns to it. In this game of becoming, the being of becoming also plays the game with itself; the aeon (time), says Heraclitus, is a child who plays, plays at draughts (Diels 53). The being of becoming, the eternal return, is the second moment of the game, but also the third term, identical to the two moments and valid for the whole. For the eternal return is the distinct return of the outward movement, the distinct contemplation of the action, but also the return of the out­ward movement itself and the return of the action; at once moment and cycle of time. We must understand the secret of Heraclitus interpretation; he opposes the instinct of the game to hubris; "It is not guilty pride but the ceaselessly reawoken instinct of the game which calls forth new worlds." Not a theodicy but a cosmodicy, not a sum of injustices to be expiated but justice as the law of this world; not hubris but play, innocence. "That dangerous word hubris is indeed the touchstone for every Heraclitean. Here he must show whether he has understood or failed to recognise his master"
(Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and philosophy, 1962)

E3.4.4_REF4_LIT "TRANSFIGURATION TOWARDS THE SELF[...]

One day he made, quite literally, the most audacious of all declarations. ‘It is disadvantageous for the thinker to be linked to any single person. When a man finds himself, it is preferable that he loses himself again from time to time and then rediscovers himself once more.’ His essence is one of perpetual transformation, knowledge of himself through loss of himself, that is to say a continual becoming and eschewing of any rigid composed state: that’s why the only imperative in life encountered in his writings is ‘become what you are’. [...]

To reach an ever more open and higher viewing position, Nietzsche must always pass through the maw of pain and mutilation: ‘The rupture of all individual bonds is hard, but a wing grows in place of each bond.’ Being of a fundamentally demonic nature, he knows only the most brutal of transformations, as through a combustion process: like the phoenix that is consumed in fire, to be reborn with new colours and fresh vigour, singing, hovering over its own ash, thus the intellectual spirit of his soul must pass through the funeral pyre of contradiction, so that the spirit rises again ever renewed and liberated from convictions past their prime.[...]

Nietzsche is the polar opposite to Goethe. Instead of aspiring to a greater integration of his self, he willed an ever more passionate disintegration: like all those gripped by the demon, he becomes ever more overheated, more impatient, more vehement, more revolutionary, more chaotic as he advances in age. Already his exterior attitude is at odds with a conventional evolution. Nietzsche sets out from old age. [...]

At around thirty, the age when the conventional man turns to a bourgeois existence, at the time when Goethe became a state councilor, when Kant or Schiller took up professorships, Nietzsche had already left his official functions behind him and abandoned with great relief his chair at Basel. It is then he takes the first step towards his true self; the first movement to enter his own universe, his first inward metamorphosis and this rift also constitutes his awakening as an artist. The real Nietzsche begins with his incursion into the present, the tragic Nietzsche, the man out of time, whose gaze is now turned to the future and whose heart yearns for the new man who may one day emerge. In between he lays the firedamp of transformations, consummate eversions of his inner self – the abrupt wind change from philology to music, from gravity to ecstasy, from sober forbearance to the dance. At thirty-six Nietzsche is the outlaw prince, immoralist, sceptic, poet and musician, a ‘better youth’ than he had ever been in younger days, free of the past and of all scholarship, he resists the claims of the present, and pledges himself to the men of the future. Unlike the conventional artist where the years of development lead to a sense of stability, evolving into a more sober-minded and methodical existence, in Nietzsche they only serve to liberate him from all attachments. The rhythm of this rejuvenation is diabolical and without parallel. At forty the language of Nietzsche, his thought and being contain more red blood cells, exhibit a far healthier hue, display more temerity, passion and music than as a youth of seventeen and the solitary of Sils-Maria fairly glides through his work as if on wings, like a dancer, with much lighter step than the prematurely aged professor of twenty-four. In Nietzsche there is an intensification of life rather than a slowing down: his transformations become ever swifter, freer, more airborne, multifaceted, resilient, tense, malicious, cynical; he finds no ‘standpoint’ anywhere for a mind in perpetual motion. Barely has he anchored somewhere, than ‘his skin chaps and splits’; in the end his own life is incapable of following the metamorphosis of his spirit and the changes in him gradually take on a cinematographic like tempo, where the image continually quivers and shifts. [...]"
(Stefan Zweig, Nietzsche, 1930)

E3.4.4_REF5_PH "THE STRUCTURE OF CONSCIOUSNESS IS A POLYPHONIC STRUCTURE IN WHICH SEVERAL OVERLAPPING VOICES TRAVEL PARALLEL AND SIMULTANEOUSLY WITHOUT CONCERN FOR DISCORD, CONTRADICTION, OR AMBIGUITY.
The work of sincerity will be to soften these frictions, resolve these dissonances, and restore the harmony disturbed by superstitious survivals—superstitions—and artificial attachments. Have you evolved and don't dare admit it? Are your professions of faith overwhelmed and swept away by the future, that is, by the maturing of conviction? Does your conscience, attached to a bygone creed, lag behind itself as a believer? May sincerity reconsider and resolve this cacophony of belief and creed. May it synchronize all anachronisms, and may thought and speech, our convictions and our oaths, finally beat in unison."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch,The vertues and love, 1970)

E3.4.4_REF6_PO "THOUGHTS
[...]
Of vista—suppose some sight in arriere through the formative chaos, 
     presuming the growth, fulness, life, now attain’d on the journey,
(But I see the road continued, and the journey ever continued;)
Of what was once lacking on earth, and in due time has become supplied—and of what will yet be supplied,
Because all I see and know I believe to have its main purport in what will yet be supplied."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E3.4.4_REF7_CUR “Those who seek the depth of being inevitably encounter simplicity.”
(Constantin Brancusi)

E3.4.4_REF8_PH TO BE IS TO ACT. THE "STRANGER" WE FIND IN INTROSPECTION IS NOT A VOID, BUT ACTION, LIFE, AND WILL.
"What is the thing itself that belongs to the first and highest category, and to which all others relate?" Aristotle replies that it is action (3) that can explain nature, which is all movement. An attentive observer of nature, whom Plato disdained, Aristotle recognized that everything in nature is movement. He also recognized that movement is a kind of life (4), as he says somewhere. Finally, he recognized that the cause of movement is the true cause and that life cannot result from anything other than life. Therefore, those who claim to explain it by movement reverse the true order of things. Phenomenal movement can arise from movement. However, its primary source is something superior: action. Action is like a moment that lasts without succession. This is an attempt to conceive of the eternal and the positive aspect of duration, where negation introduces succession. Later, we will recognize that the basis of action is will and that the basis of will is love.
Therefore, to be is to act; action is existence itself.

Notes:
(3) Although Aristotle himself does not expressly mention it, it appears that the source of this assertion is the intimate consciousness of effort or will. Although Aristotle does not formally invoke it in his Metaphysics, it plays a different role in his philosophical system than it does in Plato's. Like Socrates, Plato pays little attention to human freedom, so both tend to equate virtue with science. This is not the case with Aristotle, however, as free activity occupies a considerable place in his philosophy.
(4) While Platonism holds that everything depends on ideas — things that, according to Leibniz, are inert and dead — Aristotle and the early philosophers, notably Thales, believe that everything begins with life. If life were not at the origin, how would it have appeared? Aristotle says that in the beginning of every natural series, the best comes first. He opposes this idea to the materialists of his time, who, based on their observation of nature, believed that Platonism had made common cause with them.
It is interesting to note that, throughout history, philosophy has followed the same course as nature. Among the earliest species in nature, obscure life was weak. They could only survive amid so many causes of destruction thanks to the stony shells in which they hid, almost immobile. These species were succeeded by others that compensated for their lack of defense with mobility. The same progress can be seen in philosophy, from Plato to Aristotle. Aristotle's entities without movement or force were succeeded by principles endowed with life and empty generalities. These generalities have only a logical existence and cannot be causes of real existence. They are full individualities, so to speak—objects of immediate experience that testify to themselves."
(Félix Ravaisson, Philosophical testament, 1901)

E3.4.4_REF9_PH VLADIMIR JANKÉLÉVITCH DEFINES TRUE INNOCENCE AS A SPIRITUAL "SIMPLICITY" AND "HAPPY TRANSPARENCY" THAT, BY REJECTING THE NARCISSISTIC TRAP OF SELF-REFLECTION, ALLOWS THE SOUL TO FORGET ITSELF AND COINCIDE PERFECTLY WITH REALITY, thereby becoming a direct, living medium through which the "total presence of the world" is revealed.
"Only true innocence—that which is a spiritual regime of the whole soul—deserves the name of simplicity. Innocence is simple in that simplicity excludes the folding and doubling of consciousness upon itself. It is the transparent soul that forgets itself in its purpose. The innocent person is perfectly liberated from himself. He is unaware of the morose returns of self-interest that make all consciousness clandestine, malicious, and vain. The reflexive, secondary nature that Bergson and Fénelon relentlessly pursued does not touch him at all. There are no ulterior motives behind that smooth forehead, no clouds over that candor. The innocent person coincides with his object in a great movement of extra-lucid sympathy. This is the kind of ecstasy that Bergson calls pure perception. Is the chastity and freshness of the painter's glimpse not ecstasy in its own way? No banal memories, associations of ideas, verbal concepts, social stereotypes, or spatial patterns clutter or intercept the gaze of the learned ignoramus. However, self-awareness, accustomed to convenient concepts, ignores the expansive movement of innocence. Through anxious retroversion, it turns backward—that is, toward itself—an impulse that should propel us toward the future or identify us with the spectacle of the world. The innocent person not only sees through the opacity with seemingly X-ray vision but is also transparent to others. He sees the truth and is the truth. He is in immediate contact with reality and is our intermediary with it. He is the medium of mediation and therefore the spokesperson of truth and the vector of cosmic forces. As Unamuno would say, it is truth in the flesh that speaks through his mouth. Narcissus, to whom the mirror reflects his own image, falls absurdly and circularly in love with a reflection of himself: disappointed by false otherness, by this other who is himself, by this beloved who is the lover, Narcissus sinks ever deeper into the mire of his concern. His Alter Ego is always Ego! The innocent, on the other hand, restore to love its transitive vocation, to the self the liberating self-forgetfulness. And we, who are not innocent but anxious, read in the absent gaze of innocence the total presence of the world; yes, it is the total presence of the world that looks at us with its serene and limpid gaze in those child's eyes."
(Vladimir Jankélévitch, Somewhere in the Unfinished, 1978)

E3.4.4_REF10_LIT A_Egon Schiele_Self Portrait with Physalis_1912 /Egon Schiele/ ; A_Francesco Clemente_Self portrait_2 /Francesco Clemente/

"Beyond the difficulty of communicating oneself, there is the supreme difficulty of being oneself. This soul, or life within us, by no means agrees with the life outside us. If one has the courage to ask her what she thinks, she is always saying the very opposite to what other people say. [...]

The man* who is aware of himself is henceforward independent; and he is never bored, and life is only too short, and he is steeped through and through with a profound yet temperate happiness. He alone lives, while other people, slaves of ceremony, let life slip past them in a kind of dream. Once conform, once do what other people do because they do it, and a lethargy steals over all the finer nerves and faculties of the soul. She becomes all outer show and inward emptiness; dull, callous, and indifferent. [...]

Let us simmer over our incalculable cauldron, our enthralling confusion, our hotch-potch of impulses, our perpetual miracle — for the soul throws up wonders every second. Movement and change are the essence of our being; rigidity is death; conformity is death: let us say what comes into our heads, repeat ourselves, contradict ourselves, fling out the wildest nonsense, and follow the most fantastic fancies without caring what the world does or thinks or says."
(Viginia Woolf in her essay about the essays of Montaigne, published in Common Reader)

E3.4.4_REF11_LIT A_Edgar de Souza_(1)

THE SELF IS AN "ETERNAL BECOMING WITHOUT EVER BEING RIGID OR RESTING."
 "[Nietzsche] once uttered, literally, the boldest of all sentences: « It is disadvantageous for the thinker to be bound to one person. When one has found oneself, one must try, from time to time, to lose oneself - and then to encounter oneself again. » His essence is a continual transformation, self- knowledge through the loss of oneself, that is, eternal becoming without ever  being rigid or resting: that is why the one and only imperative regarding one's  life that is recurrent in all his writings is « become who you are »."
(Stefan Zweig, Nietzsche, 1930)

E3.4.4_REF12_PH A_Eric McCollum_The cocoon series_(1) ; A_Eric McCollum_The cocoon series_(2) ; A_Eric McCollum_The cocoon series-(3) ; A_Eric McCollum_The cocoon series_(4) /Eric McCollum/

A CAPACITY FOR WINGS
"My Cocoon tightens - Colors teaze -
I’m feeling for the Air -
A dim capacity for Wings 
Demeans the Dress I wear -

A power of Butterfly must be -
The Aptitude to fly 
Meadows of Majesty concedes 
And easy Sweeps of Sky -

So I must baffle at the Hint 
And cipher at the Sign
And make much blunder, if at last 
I take the clue divine -"
(Emily Dickinson, 1865)

E3.4.4_REF13_PH PLAYING IS ALWAYS PLAYING ANOTHER LIFE.
"So, we must understand that every game is a symbolic escape. When we play, we are always trying to escape our own existence. Playing, however modestly or furtively, always means living another life. It means exploring the infinity of our contingency. Every player is an adventurer."
(Nicolas Grimaldi, An Ordinary Madness, 2009)

E3.5. The "I" Contains Multitudes: The Stranger as the Universal Self. The "true" self is not isolated but inherently collective.

E3.5.1. The Myth of Separation: The Porous Body and the Collective Mind: scientifically and temporally, the isolated individual is an illusion.

E3.5.1.a. The Porous Body: Matter, Nature, and the Illusion of Closed Systems Focus: the self is not a fortress, but a fluid event—a "whirlpool" or a "thin skin" indistinguishable from the environment.

E1.5.B.12.4.c_REF3_SCI.wE3.5.1.a.

"THE TEEMING HORDES OF LIVING THINGS ON EARTH, NOT ONLY IN SPACE BUT IN TIME, ARE ACTUALLY ALL ONE MASSIVE, SINGLE ORGANISM just as certainly as each one of us (in our own minds) seems to be a distinct human being throughout our limited lifetime… Each of us is, equally, an independent living human and also just one utterly minute, utterly brief unit of a single vast body that is life on Earth. From this point of view, the passing of human generations, in peace or turmoil, is nothing more than the shedding of cells from one’s skin. [...]
Most of the body’s cells are continually turning over. Some cells renew over a period of years, while other types of cells are replaced every few days. So, most of the molecules (and therefore atoms) of our bodies return to the planet as well, in an endless atomic recycling and replacement. From this perspective, then, are we living beings moving around upon this rock we call Earth? Or are we in fact the Earth itself, whose atoms have self-organized to form these transitory beings that think of themselves as self-sufficient and separate from each other, even though they only ever arose from and will inevitably return to the atomic substance of the planet? [...]

We breathe out molecules (carbon dioxide) and perspire molecules (water, pheromones) and excrete molecules (urine, feces) into the environments around us, and in turn, we eat food that we break down into absorbable molecules (proteins, carbohydrates, fats), breathe in oxygen molecules from the planetary plant mass, and absorb molecules through our skin… since every surface we touch potentially has absorbable molecules on it. While you might say that molecules are only your own when they are within your body, complementarily, there are no real distinctions between “our own” molecules and the molecules of the world around us. They move from us, outward, and come into us from the outside. At the molecular level, just as at the cellular level, each of us is in perpetual, direct continuity with the entire biomass of the planet. [...]

At the smallest, Planck scales, the very smallest creations of all are wholes without parts that merely emanate from space-time and dissolve back into it like phantoms — there but not there, real but not real. Everything only looks like a thing from its own particular vantage point, the level of scale at which it can be seen as “itself,” as a whole. Above that level of scale, it is hidden from view by the higher-level emergent properties it gives rise to. Below that level, it disappears from view into the active phenomena from which it emerged. [...]

While we feel ourselves to be thinking, living beings with independent lives inside the universe, the complementary view is also true: we don’t live in the universe; we embody it. It’s just like how we habitually think of ourselves as living on the planet even as, in a complementary way, we are the planet. […]

You are this body, and you are these molecules, and you are these atoms, and you are these quantum entities, and you are the quantum foam, and you are the energetic field of space-time, and, ultimately, you are the fundamental awareness out of which all these emerge, Planck moment by Planck moment."
(Neil Theise, Notes on Complexity: A Scientific Theory of Connection, Consciousness, and Being, 2023)

E3.5.1.a_REF1_LIT A_Utagawa Hiroshige_Naruto whirlpool

I AM THE ONE WHO ORGANIZES MYSELF IN THIS WAY, ARRANGING THE SAME MATERIALS DIFFERENTLY.
“I do not exist insofar as I am not free. Insofar as I am conditioned and determined solely by external energies, impulses, and forces, I am merely a crossroads—a battlefield and a random meeting place. Yes, I am one of countless crossroads, but at least I am a crossroads. [...]
The "I" is the result of a specific situation determined by the environment. The "we" is just another "I"; it is the result of broader conditioning. Groups are also determined and placed in situations. Thus, I am no more illusory than the group. Moreover, the self has the advantage of being the most powerful and tenacious illusion. On the other hand, as I have said, illusion has the truth of illusion. [...]
I am this whirlpool. There are countless whirlpools in this wide river. The same waters swirl in each whirlpool as in the rest of the river—dirty, clear, or muddy waters carrying leaves, plants, and bits of branches. When the waters recede, the whirlpools seem to disappear. But they continue to exist virtually. When the water rises again, the whirlpools reappear.
The water is the same in every whirlpool and is like the matter of the whirlpool itself. However, the dynamic form of each whirlpool—its "structure," movement, and so on—is different from the others. One whirlpool may be faster, another less dangerous, and another have a broader, undulating movement, different moving architecture, and a different rhythm.
Each whirlpool is unique. Its organization and movement are its personality. A self is a particular organization. Each whirlpool is different from all the others. No two are alike. Each whirlpool is anarchic. Each has its own obvious, non-illusory reality in the way it organizes the waters of the common river. Each self both affirms and denies the group. Each self is both social and antisocial. Therefore, it exists and affirms itself. Every sign.
You can't bathe in the same river twice. Perhaps. The waters flow; other waters come. But each one creates its own whirlpool.
Perhaps the whirlpools will disappear. They will only disappear with the universal river.
I am so real that I cannot escape myself. I organize myself. I am the one who organizes myself in this way, arranging the same materials differently."
(Eugène Ionesco, Diary in Pieces, 1967)

E3.5.1.a_REF2_PSI I_Violeta Lópiz_Art for At the Drop of a Cat

SHAPLAND REDEFINES THE SELF NOT AS A FORTRESS (WHICH SHE CALLS THE "SHIVERING, WEAK THING WE MUST SHORE UP"), BUT AS A "THIN SKIN"—a site of entanglement and vulnerability where the "I" and the "Other" constantly merge.
 “Yes, we spend our lives trying to discern where we end and the rest of the world begins. The boundary is so difficult to discern because, when all the stories fall away, there is no boundary — only a fluid, permeable membrane that is constantly shifting depending on the stories we tell ourselves about what we are and where we belong. Lynn Margulis captured this in ecological and evolutionary terms when she observed that “life is a unitary phenomenon, no matter how we express that fact.” Dr. King captured the sociological equivalent in his insistence that “we are caught in an inescapable network of mutuality.” Whitman captured its most elemental and most existential dimensions in that immortal line: “Every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you.

When we fail to see the connections between things, we fail to anticipate the consequences of any one thing. A century before we began slaying entire ecosystems with pesticides meant to eradicate individual species, before we began tinkering with individual genes in the complex cathedral of the genome, the naturalist John Muir exulted that “when we try to pick out anything by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the universe” — an exultation that now reads as an admonition.

How to unblind ourselves to this cosmos of connection and its attendant forcefield of consequence is what Jenn Shapland explores in her essay collection Thin Skin (public library) — “a corporeal account of how thin the membrane is between each of us and one another, between each of us and the world outside,” fomented by the medical reality of her epidermis missing a layer: a diagnosis of literally thin skin.”
(Maria Popova's review of Jenn Shapland's Thin Skin, 2023 in The Marginalian)


"There is no “outside”… The world is a part of our cellular makeup… we impact it with every tiny choice we make. […]

I began to see what I now think of as literalized metaphors for my entanglement, my complicity, all over my life: in my dermatological diagnosis of “thin skin,” in my friends’ having babies as the world burned, in the crystals cropping up everywhere to heal us of something, in my own sense of vulnerability and my desire to feel safe. I began to question the idea of myself as a being in need of protection, indeed as something that could be protected. Nothing can protect us… It struck me as I wrote that I was utterly vulnerable to every other person, every other creature on Earth, and they were also vulnerable to me… I began to seek other ways of understanding the self that might be more useful than this shivering, weak thing we must shore up against the world. [...]

To be thin-skinned is to feel keenly, to perceive things that might go unseen, unnoticed, that others might prefer not to notice."
(Jenn Shapland, Thin Skin, 2023)

E1.5.B.12.4.b_REF11_LIT.wE3.5.1.a_REF2_PSI

"The past is all around us. Darwin’s biggest contribution was to show us that all individual organisms are connected through time. It doesn’t matter whether you compare kangaroos, bacteria, humans, or salamanders, we all have incredible chemical similarities…. [The pioneering Russian geochemist Vladimir] Vernadsky showed us that organisms are not only connected through time but also through space. The carbon dioxide we exhale as a waste product becomes the life-giving force for a plant; in turn, the oxygen waste of a plant gives us life. This exchange of gas is what the word spirit means. Spirituality is essentially the act of breathing. But the connection doesn’t stop at the exchange of gases in the atmosphere. We are also physically connected, and you can see evidence of this everywhere you look. Think of the protists that live in the hind-gut of the termite, or the fungi that live in the rootstock of trees and plants. The birds that flitter from tree to tree transport fungi spores throughout the environment. Their droppings host a community of insects and microorganisms. When rain falls on the droppings, spores are splashed back up on the tree, creating pockets for life to begin to grow again. This interdependence is an inexorable fact of life. [...]

The fact that we are connected through space and time shows that life is a unitary phenomenon, no matter how we express that fact. We are not one living organism, but we constitute a single ecosystem with many differentiated parts. I don’t see this as a contradiction, because parts and wholes are nestled in each other."
(Lynn Margulis , Talking on the Water: Conversations about Nature and Creativity)

E3.5.1.a_REF3_LIT STEINBECK DOUBTS THE EXISTENCE OF TRULY 'CLOSED SYSTEMS'. Instead, he argues that "Everything impinges on everything else," linking the individual chemistry of the body to the broader "multiform life."
"No one thing ever merges gradually into anything else; the steps are discontinuous, but often so very minute as to seem truly continuous. If the investigation is carried deep enough, the factor in question, instead of being graphable as a continuous process, will be seen to function by discrete quanta with gaps or synapses between, as do quanta of energy, undulations of light. The apparently definitive answer occurs when causes and effects both arise on the same large plateau which is bounded a great way off by the steep rise which announces the next plateau. If the investigation is extended sufficiently, that distant rise will, however, inevitably be encountered; the answer which formerly seemed definitive now will be seen to be at least slightly inadequate and the picture will have to be enlarged so as to include the plateau next further out. Everything impinges on everything else, often into radically different systems, although in such cases faintly. We doubt very much if there are any truly “closed systems." [...]
Everything is potentially everywhere — the body is potentially cancerous, phthisic, strong to resist or weak to receive. In one swing of the balance the waiting life pounces in and takes possession and grows strong while our own individual chemistry is distorted past the point where it can maintain its balance. This we call dying, and by the process we do not give nor offer but are taken by a multiform life and used for its proliferation. These things are balanced. A man is potentially all things too, greedy and cruel, capable of great love or great hatred, of balanced or unbalanced so-called emotions. This is the way he is — one factor in a surge of striving. And he continues to ask “why” without first admitting to himself his cosmic identity."
(John Steinbeck,  The Log from the Sea of Cortez, 1940)

E3.5.1.a_REF3.1_LIT  "I AM MUCH MORE THAN THE SUM OF MY CELLS... AND THEY ARE MUCH MORE THAN THE DIVISION OF ME." But we deny our "cosmic identity" because it threatens our small, individualistic worldview.
"There are colonies of pelagic tunicates [Pyrosoma giganteum] which have taken a shape like the finger of a glove. Each member of the colony is an individual animal, but the colony is another individual animal, not at all like the sum of its individuals. Some of the colonists, girdling the open end, have developed the ability, one against the other, of making a pulsing movement very like muscular action. Others of the colonists collect the food and distribute it, and the outside of the glove is hardened and protected against contact. Here are two animals, and yet the same thing—something the early Church would have been forced to call a mystery. When the early Church called some matter “a mystery” it accepted that thing fully and deeply as so, but simply not accessible to reason because reason had no business with it. So a man of individualistic reason, if he must ask, “Which is the animal, the colony or the individual?”’ must abandon his particular kind of reason and say, “Why, it’s two animals and they aren’t alike any more than the cells of my body are like me. I am much more than the sum of my cells and, for all I know, they are much more than the division of me.” There is no quietism in such acceptance, but rather the basis for a far deeper understanding of us and our world. And now this is ready for the taboo-box. [...] 
It is not enough to say that we cannot know or judge because all the information is not in. The process of gathering knowledge does not lead to knowing. A child’s world spreads only a little beyond his understanding while that of a great scientist thrusts outward immeasurably. An answer is invariably the parent of a great family of new questions. So we draw worlds and fit them like tracings against the world about us, and crumple them when they do not fit and draw new ones. The tree-frog in the high pool in the mountain cleft, had he been endowed with human reason, on finding a cigarette butt in the water might have said, “Here is an impossibility. There is no tobacco hereabouts nor any paper. Here is evidence of fire and there has been no fire. This thing cannot fly nor crawl nor blow in the wind. In fact, this thing cannot be and I will deny it, for if I admit that this thing is here the whole world of frogs is in danger, and from there it is only one step to anti-frogicentricism.” And so that frog will for the rest of his life try to forget that something that is, is. [...]

"The whole is necessarily everything, the whole world of fact and fancy, body and psyche, physical fact and spiritual truth, individual and collective, life and death, macrocosm and microcosm (the greatest quanta here, the greatest synapse between these two), conscious and unconscious, subject and object. The whole picture is portrayed by is, the deepest word of deep ultimate reality, not shallow or partial as reasons are, but deeper and participating… And all this against the hot beach on an Easter Sunday, with the passing day and the passing time. This little trip of ours was becoming a thing and a dual thing, with collecting and eating and sleeping merging with the thinking-speculating activity. Quality of sunlight, blueness and smoothness of water, boat engines, and ourselves were all parts of a larger whole and we could begin to feel its nature but not its size."
(John Steinbeck,  The Log from the Sea of Cortez, 1940)

E3.5.1.b. The Collective Consciousness: Hybridity, Memory, and the Multitudes of Time Focus. Our internal world is populated by ancestors, borrowed memories, and a "stranger" within that connects us to all humanity.

E3.5.1.b_REF1_PO “PROVERBS OF CONSCIOUSNESS
1. Consciousness is the product of natural selection,
like enlarged canines or binocular vision.
2. Matter and spirit, time and eternity, subject and
object are dualities of perspective, as one can look
from various angles at a single scene.
3. Brain activity causes thought as the movement of a
bow across a string causes music; thought causes brain
activity as music causes the movement of a bow across
a string.
4. Thought and music exist both within and outside of
time.
5. Now is a point without dimension; the future is
imagination; the past is memory.
6. The self is the subject of infinite regress.
7. The separation of consciousness from the whole of
being is an illusion that can be overcome only by an
act of imagination.
8. Death is the permanent loss of consciousness, which
does not by any means end one's existence, only one's
consciousness.
9. Since consciousness is a function of the brain, it
cannot outlive the brain, any more than sight can
outlive the eye.
10. All being is one, single and indivisible, both within
and outside of time.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E3.5.1.b_REF2_PH “Dionysus, Hybrid God

”To all the bastards, all the mixed-race people, all the centaurs, all the mermaids, to all the motley,
heterogeneous, colorful, crossbred, and mixed beings who have always been told that they had no
identity or too many identities..."
(Gabrielle Halpern, Tous centaures, The Apple Tree)

Dionysus is a hybrid god because, although he was conceived by Zeus and Selene, a mortal,  he was not born of a mortal woman. Hera, Zeus's wife, managed to have Selene killed, and Zeus took Dionysus from Selene's womb and carried him to term in his thigh. Dionysus emerged from Zeus's thigh.

Dionysus is mad with rage when he is not recognized as a god; he is a god with an identity problem. No one knows where he comes from, his arrival is always untimely, he is often preceded by a mask that a fisherman, for example, finds, then he arrives in the flesh, jumping, in a dancer's gesture; He is a stranger, a strange foreigner, an unsettling strangeness. Who is he? What does he want?

He is surrounded by a hybrid troupe of women who leave everything behind to accompany him, including family and husbands, to help him satisfy his vengeance by dismembering those who doubted him. This colorful, hybrid troupe are the maenads or bacchantes, and with them he brings out a collective unconscious of alcohol. He is the god of wine and sex; he is also accompanied by strange, weird, shady people. Tragedy lurks around Dionysus, and he is its father; see Euripides' The Bacchae.

Every drunken party is his lot; he deconstructs society, he destroys public order, he deconstructs what was taken for granted to propose a richer society, more educated in all realities, a society that also recognizes its otherness.

Drugs would also be his means for a society to experience otherness far from the expected frameworks if he lived with us; but he lives with us in rave parties, in drug binges, in electronic music, in all the mutations of the genre; he is the contemporary god of our time."
(Martine Aronowicz, Dionysus, Hybrid God, 2023)

E3.5.1.b_REF3_PO "CROSSING BROOKLYN FERRY

 1
Flood-tide below me! I see you face to face!
Clouds of the west—sun there half an hour high—I see you also face to face.

Crowds of men and women attired in the usual costumes, how curious you are to me!
On the ferry-boats the hundreds and hundreds that cross, returning 
    home, are more curious to me than you suppose,
And you that shall cross from shore to shore years hence are more to
me, and more in my meditations, than you might suppose.

 2
The impalpable sustenance of me from all things at all hours of the day,
The simple, compact, well-join’d scheme, myself disintegrated, every one disintegrated yet part of the scheme,
The similitudes of the past and those of the future,
The glories strung like beads on my smallest sights and hearings, on the 
    walk in the street and the passage over the river,
The current rushing so swiftly and swimming with me far away,
The others that are to follow me, the ties between me and them,
The certainty of others, the life, love, sight, hearing of others.

Others will enter the gates of the ferry and cross from shore to shore,
Others will watch the run of the flood-tide,
Others will see the shipping of Manhattan north and west, and the heights of Brooklyn to the south and east,
Others will see the islands large and small;
Fifty years hence, others will see them as they cross, the sun half an hour high,
A hundred years hence, or ever so many hundred years hence, others will see them,
Will enjoy the sunset, the pouring-in of the flood-tide, the falling-back to the sea of the ebb-tide.

3
It avails not, time nor place—distance avails not,
I am with you, you men and women of a generation, or ever so many generations hence,
Just as you feel when you look on the river and sky, so I felt,
Just as any of you is one of a living crowd, I was one of a crowd,
Just as you are refresh’d by the gladness of the river and the bright flow,
I was refresh’d,
Just as you stand and lean on the rail, yet hurry with the swift current, I stood yet was hurried,
Just as you look on the numberless masts of ships and the thickstemm’d pipes of steamboats, I look’d. [...]

5
What is it then between us?
What is the count of the scores or hundreds of years between us?
Whatever it is, it avails not—distance avails not, and place avails not,
I too lived, Brooklyn of ample hills was mine,
I too walk’d the streets of Manhattan island, and bathed in the waters around it,
I too felt the curious abrupt questionings stir within me,
In the day among crowds of people sometimes they came upon me,
In my walks home late at night or as I lay in my bed they came upon me,
I too had been struck from the float forever held in solution,
I too had receiv’d identity by my body,
That I was I knew was of my body, and what I should be I knew I should be of my body."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E1.7.D.5.2_REF13_PO.wE3.5.1.b.

"KOSMOS
Who includes diversity and is Nature,
Who is the amplitude of the earth, and the coarseness and sexuality of the earth, and the great charity of the earth and the equilibrium also,
Who has not look’d forth from the windows the eyes for nothing, or whose brain held audience with messengers for nothing,
Who contains believers and disbelievers, who is the most majestic lover,
Who holds duly his or her triune proportion of realism, spiritualism, and of the aesthetic or intellectual,
Who having consider’d the body finds all its organs and parts good,
Who, out of the theory of the earth and of his or her body understands by subtle analogies all other theories,
The theory of a city, a poem, and of the large politics of these States;
Who believes not only in our globe with its sun and moon, but in other globes with their suns and moons,
Who, constructing the house of himself or herself, not for a day but for all time, sees races, eras, dates, generations,
The past, the future, dwelling there, like space, inseparable together."
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E3.5.1.b_REF4_LIT TAPPING OF SOME GREAT RESERVOIR OF PLANETARY, IF NOT OF COSMIC, EXPERIENCE
“I saw most of these field-paths, these wayside heaps of stones, these hawthorn stumps, these wind-blown tamarisk-bushes, these dung-heaps by old cattle-barns, these cart-ruts going sea, once only, for I was always exploring in new  directions, but for that very reason, in my sensitized state, they became more than just hedges and ditches round the town of Bognor! 

Not that they were transformed, not that they became picturesque or “artistic.” But I saw them as they had entered, and as they had left, the consciousness of men and women, going about their affairs, seeing them without seeing them, as they followed their purposes and their desires. But I saw them as they were—no! as they were when they had passed through the half-conscious consciousness of all these human minds. I saw them as you see the designs round the illuminated letters in old breviaries. From being “minute particulars” they became “universals,” each one an enchanted “gleichnis,” or symbol, of that secret burden of unspoken knowledge under which all those inanimate things that are the background of our life,  droop, stiffen, or hold their breath when you catch them off-guard.” 
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 378-379)


“But I remember how, when wandering with Willy in the neighbourhood of Les Halles, down in some narrow streets among tall, ancient, very Gothic-looking houses, houses that had that dim, rich, massive, intricate appearance, which, of all things in an old historic city fascinates me the most, we both looked up, just as a couple of Pantagruelians, and caught sight of a lovely sylph-like figure looking down upon us with intense interest from a mediaeval casement high up above our heads. This vision, I recollect, was as disturbing to William as it was to John, but whether it was John or William who made the gesture that caused the figure to disappear I cannot tell. Its vanishing was clearly not followed by any descent to the street-door; and, though we could not help lingering there a while, she never came back to that high mediaeval window. Even now, as I think of this incident, an indescribable sensation, like that of some old romance of a thousand years ago, steals over me. If you cannot follow me, reader, in this, I have no more to say: but I am certain that my own secretest happiness, as I go about the world, comes from certain revelations of this kind to which I am porous, and to which I am continually struggling to make myself more porous. 

These revelations have to do with precisely such recurrent human situations as the one in this case, of two men watching from the pavement of a street a solitary girl in a high window. You may laugh at me, as I am accustomed to being laughed at, but I cannot tell you how strongly I feel that the kind of imagination which the gods have given me is more than imagination! In fact almost all the power we call “imagination” may come from an actual tapping of some great reservoir of planetary, if not of cosmic, experience. As I write about this episode now, the whole thing comes over me as if from the touch of a magic wand! It is because of these revelations of the eternally recurrent moments of human life, moments which, like this one of two men looking at a girl in a window, must have repeated themselves for thousands of years, that I feel such a nostalgic preference for ancient buildings over modern ones. 

To get this sense of “eternal recurrence” which is to my mind the secret of the most significant poetry of our race and a feeling far more important than any scientific “law,” you must have something old in the background. Nature is always old, and therefore Nature can always serve this purpose; but, if you are flung into the midst of a city, what you must have is the presence somewhere or other of buildings old enough to give you this sense of the continuity of the generations. To the modern aesthete all that I am saying now will sound literary, sentimental, affected. But it is these moderns themselves, not I, who are the “affected” ones. They are shutting off the magnetic current between themselves and the accumulated poetic feeling of our race’s long history. 

No, this emotion of mine, which always returns to me when I think of that figure at the high Gothic window, amid a dim intricacy of balconied masonry, must have, whatever its secret may be, a mysterious connection with the organic link that binds together the human generations. We inherit other things from our remote ancestors; why should we not inherit particular memories? Why should we not inherit, buried fathom-deep in the soul, certain intensely vivid moments of awareness, moments that were experienced by the men of old time hundreds, even thousands of years, before we were born? But even if what we inherit is only the capacity for response, or the groove of response, to such heightened moments, it is certain that, just as we add something of our own experience to the great familiar works of art, like Hamlet or Faust, so we are all of us allowed to re-experience in our own lives emotions and gestures that have recurred again and again down the ages. A fusion of balconies and roofs, is, I admit, a simple enough image and no unusual one, but by having recurred through so many ages and by having gathered to itself the feelings of so many generations, it comes to be something symbolic and mysterious. This actual girl may have been a silly little good-for-nothing, a wanton hussy, a selfish baggage; but that is only what she was superficially. In essentials—though she were the most frivolous girl in the town—she answered to the gathered-up poetic emotion of thousands and thousands of years! “ 
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 435-437)

E3.5.1.b_REF5_PO "IT IS GOOD TO REMEMBER OTHER PEOPLE'S MEMORIES
like someone who offers to carry another person's groceries
from the supermarket
it is good to use words we never use, words
we only know from botany books from cruise advertisements
from rental agreements
it is good, therefore, to use borrowed words
even if only to remember
that we only have second-hand words
it is good to stay over from time to time
at a friend's house
to wear one of their old T-shirts to adopt 
some of their habits
wear at night if possible
one of their recurring dreams
it's good to meet people once in a while
whom we knew in childhood
it's good to make an effort for a while
to look like the memory they have of us
it's good to suddenly come across a handful of sand
in the pocket of a pair of jeans
we haven't worn in a long time
follow the instructions of the horoscope of a sign
that governs a day on which we were not born
dressing according to the weather forecast
for a city we never thought of visiting
it's good at least once in our lives to take a trip
in the company of a dead relative
it's good to write poems from time to time
with journeys inside
with cities and memories of landscapes inside
that seem to have been written
by someone else"
(Ana Martins Marques, The Book of Similarities, 2015)


"É BOM LEMBRAR LEMBRANÇAS DOS OUTROS
como quem se oferece para carregar as compras de supermercado
de outra pessoa
é bom usar palavras que nunca usamos, palavras 
que só conhecemos dos livros de botânica dos anúncios
de cruzeiros dos contratos de locação
é bom portanto usar palavras emprestadas
nem que seja para lembrar
que só temos palavras de segunda mão
é bom ficar de vez em quando para dormir
na casa de um amigo
usar uma velha camiseta dele habitar 
alguns de seus hábitos
usar à noite se possível
um de seus sonhos recorrentes 
é bom encontrar uma vez ou outra pessoas 
que conhecemos na infância
é bom nos esforçarmos por um tempo
para parecer com a lembrança delas 
é bom topar de repente com um tanto de areia 
no bolso de uma calça jeans 
que há tempos não usamos
seguir as instruções do horóscopo de um signo
que rege um dia em que não nascemos 
vestir-nos de acordo com a previsão do tempo 
de uma cidade que nunca pensamos visitar
é bom ao menos uma vez na vida fazer uma viagem 
em companhia de um parente morto 
é bom escrever de vez em quando poemas 
com viagens por dentro 
com cidades e memórias de paisagens por dentro
que pareçam escritos
por outra pessoa"
(Ana Martins Marques, O livro das semelhanças, 2015)

E3.5.1.b_REF6_CUR A_Enrico David_Self-portrait as a proposal for a town Planter_2023 ; A_Enrico David_Enrico David_Untitled_2015 /Enrico David/

"DAVID FAVORS TIME TRAVEL TO CONNECT THE WAY THE BODY IS DEPICTED INTO DIFFERENT STATES OF BEING THROUGH VARIOUS PERIODS OF GLOBAL CIVILIZATION - whether this is sleeping, hanging, relaxing, or decaying form. His references are deliberately naïve and broad, including nods towards the Mayan culture, the Tang Dynasty, or the Wiener Werkstätte. However, David's appropriations are recontextualized to focus on their formal and universal qualities, in which dysmorphic shapes, created, for example, by photographic documentation, offer new opportunities for human and non-human figuration. The artist's work is replete with these disembodied personae, which, for all their vulnerability and grotesqueness, are frequently considered to be self-portraits.
Having fallen out of being and getting caught up in a constant mode of performative transformation, these timely reflections on the bodily form, its perception, and its threats become mirrors, from the reflections of which challenge our existential fears and desires."
(Curatorship: KW, Berlin)

E3.5.2. The Practice of the Universal Self: How to live, act, and find freedom as a participant in the Whole.

E3.5.2.a. The Metaphysics of Interbeing: The ontological shift from "I" to "We." The self as a note in a larger music or a limb of a larger body.

E3.5.2.a_REF1_PO PURE, ESSENTIAL LIFE FORCE, THE ACT OF LIFE ITSELF

“ONLY BREATH
Not Christian or Jew or Muslim, not Hindu,
Buddhist, sufi, or zen. Not any religion

or cultural system. I am not from the East
or the West, not out of the ocean or up

from the ground, not natural or ethereal, not
composed of elements at all. I do not exist,

am not an entity in this world or the next,
did not descend from Adam and Eve or any

origin story. My place is placeless, a trace
of the traceless. Neither body or soul.

I belong to the beloved, have seen the two
worlds as one and that one call to and know,

first, last, outer, inner, only that
breath breathing human being.”
(Rumi, The essential, translated by Coleman Barks, 1207-1273)

E3.5.2.a_REF2_LIT THE SOUL IS THE “BASS CONTINUO” OF EVERY BEING
"Perhaps a definition of the soul proposed by Jacques de Bourbon Busset could suit just about everyone. Using a musical image, he says that the soul is the “continuous bass” of every being, that rhythmic music, almost in unison with the beating of the heart, that everyone carries within themselves from birth. It is located at a more intimate, deeper level than consciousness, sometimes muted, sometimes muffled, but never interrupted, and which, in moments of emotion or awakening, makes itself heard. To be heard and to resonate is its way of being. Resonate is the right word. Resonating within oneself, resonating with the “basso continuo” of another, resonating with the “basso continuo” of the living universe, is its chance to be immortal. “To sing is to be,” says Rilke. Is there any other law for the soul than this: “Do not prevent music”? "
(François Cheng, Five Meditations on Beauty)

E3.5.2.a_REF3_PH WE LOVE OURSELVES, BECAUSE WE ARE MEMBERS OF JESUS CHRIST.
"To be a member is to have neither life, being, nor movement, except through the spirit of the body, and for the body.

The separate member, seeing no longer the body to which it belongs, has only a perishing and dying existence. Yet it believes it is a whole, and seeing not the body on which it depends, it believes it depends only on self, and desires to make itself both centre and body. But not having in itself a principle of life, it only goes astray, and is astonished in
the uncertainty of its being; perceiving in fact that it is not a body, and still not seeing that it is a member of a body. In short, when it comes to know itself, it has returned as it were to its own home, and loves itself only for the body. It deplores its past wanderings.

It cannot by its nature love any other thing, except for itself and to subject it to self, because each thing loves itself more than all. But in loving the body, it loves itself, because it only exists in it, by it, and for it. _Qui adhæret Deo unus spiritus est.

The body loves the hand; and the hand, if it had a will, should love itself in the same way as it is loved by the soul. All love which goes beyond this is unfair.

_Adhærens Deo unus spiritus est._ We love ourselves, because we are members of Jesus Christ. We love Jesus Christ, because He is the body of which we are members. All is one, one is in the other, like the Three Persons."
(Pascal, Pensées, Fragment 483)

E3.5.2.a_REF4_PH WE HAVE BEEN BORN NOT FOR OURSELVES, BUT FOR THE WHOLE WORLD
"Bossuet said: "When God formed man's heart, he first put goodness there." Since ancient times, however, the majority have succumbed to the temptations of selfishness. According to the Stoic saying, they have considered themselves recommended to themselves by nature rather than to others. They have regarded themselves, if not solely, at least primarily, as the center of their own actions. However, Bacon says that a man himself is a poor center for his actions.

A select few remained faithful to the original impulse. They were sympathetic to everything around them and believed they had been born, according to another Stoic saying, not for themselves, but for the whole world. The Greeks believed these people to be children of the gods and called them heroes. [...]

Heroes had very different ideas about things and human destiny.

For these noble men, whom Descartes and, after him, Leibniz would call the generous, each soul is characterized by sympathy for all others. This soul exists in others as much as in oneself and is what one might call a complex simplicity or a multiple simplicity. [...]

The great minds of early times must have believed that everything was full of souls, as the oldest philosopher, Thales, said. However different these souls might be, they were one and the same thing, whose root was divinity (1).

Note:
From the beginning, elite men were aware of a will within them that enabled independence from circumstances. They readily believed that a similar force existed in other men and that something analogous existed in all beings. They believed this force sustained life through breathing and gave it names meaning wind and breath. From these names comes the Latin word for soul, which is derived in our language. In this ancient era, many believed that all souls, although each had their own, formed a single soul. Many also believed that the universal soul was a supreme deity on which the entire world depended.
(Félix Ravaisson, Philosophical testament 1901)

E3.5.2.a_REF4.1_PH IN THE UNIVERSAL SELF, THE BOUNDARY BETWEEN THE "I" (SUBJECT) AND THE WORLD (OBJECT) DISSOLVE INTO A SINGLE, INTIMATE EXPERIENCE.
“Thus, from the earliest times, two different ways of understanding things emerged. According to one way of thinking, things were reduced almost entirely to inert bodies scattered about and assembled or dispersed in the void by blind chance. According to the other way of thinking, hidden powers, souls, or gods had made everything and ruled the world. From these two ways of thinking, two philosophies gradually emerged. One, which Cicero called 'plebeian,' Berkeley called 'petty philosophy' in the 18th century, and Leibniz called 'paupertina philosophia,' was that of Democritus and Epicurus. Their main factors were the senses and understanding; the latter was the natural auxiliary of mathematics. The other, which could be called royal and aristocratic, is that of Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and their ilk. The first, seeking principles in lower things—which are to higher things as materials are to the forms in which order and beauty appear—can be called materialism. The second can be called spiritual or spiritualist philosophy, as the subtle and the fine are opposed to the coarse.
According to Epicureanism, which developed from the philosophy of the common people, nothing was known except what the senses testified to; nothing existed except bodies and the accidents of bodies. Everyone was thus confined within themselves, concerned only with the goods and evils affecting the physical senses. From then on, the Sophists proclaimed that sensations alone were the measure of all things.
Socrates, a man of heroic spirit superior to vulgar concerns, understood that societies could not survive with such a doctrine. Convinced that sensible things were not the only things on which societies depended and that these other things could only be known through intelligence, Socrates pointed out that there were rules for discerning good and evil, right and wrong. Without these rules, no agreement could be established or maintained. He proved that there were generalities common to individuals and, consequently, a science that should prevail over their narrow interests.
Plato went further. To him, all sensible things must have intelligible models of their qualities. These models were imperfect resemblances of true beings. These immutable forms or ideas temporarily clothed the things of nature like docile matter. However, this meant taking mere modes, or extracts of things made by the understanding, as causes, which have real existence only in individuals. It was to establish as principles the abstractions created by the understanding. This is the error that Tacitus pointed out in words applicable to all idolatry: "one forges and at the same time believes, fingunt simul creduntque."

This error will play a major role throughout the history of philosophy. The mind can separate things that are actually together; this ability is called the faculty of abstraction. This is how ideas are formed; in reality, they are thoughts, acts of intelligence.

Aristotle pointed out this error, noting that the general does not exist in itself, but rather in the thought that creates it (2). [...]

Note:
The principle of this illusion seems to rely solely on the intellect to understand things and their principles. Isolated by abstraction, the intellect has no way to distinguish reality from unreality; this ability is found only in the total action of the soul—intelligence and will together.
This is what Aristotle understood.
Real things are not only those that can be conceived but also those that are known in the strict sense of the word. That is, real things are those that we experience through touch or sight. Simple conception is potential knowledge, while experience is actual knowledge. Even better is that superior kind of touch and sight that the intellect has in its intimate awareness of itself. It touches and thinks, says Aristotle. "This is true science, of which all others are imperfect imitations. True science is that in which the subject is identical to the object. Like any identification of opposites, this concept repels the simple understanding, but it is verified by experience.”
(Félix Ravaisson, Philosophical testament, 1901)

E3.5.2.a_REF5_PH A_Anish Kapoor_untitled_2007

 "ONCE WE FATHOM THE FUNDAMENTAL REALITY OF INTERBEING, SCHRÖDINGER OBSERVES, IT BECOMES IMPOSSIBLE TO WISH ANYTHING FOR OURSELVES THAT WE DO NOT WISH FOR EVERYONE ELSE or to harm anyone else without harming ourselves"
(Maria Popova's review of Erwin Schrödinger's My View of the World, 1951)

"The conditions for your existence are almost as old as the rocks. For thousands of years men have striven and suffered and begotten and women have brought forth in pain. A hundred years ago, perhaps, another man sat on this spot; like you he gazed with awe and yearning in his heart at the dying light of the glaciers. Like you he was begotten of man and born of woman. He felt pain and brief joy as you do. Was he someone else? Was it not you yourself? What is this Self of yours? What was the necessary condition for making the thing conceived this time into you, just you and not someone else? What clearly intelligible scientific meaning can this ‘someone else’ really have? If she who is now your mother had cohabited with someone else and had a son by him, and your father had done likewise, would you have come to be? Or were you living in them, and in your father’s father… thousands of years ago? And even if this is so, why are you not your brother, why is your brother not you, why are you not one of your distant cousins? What justifies you in obstinately discovering this difference — the difference between you and someone else — when objectively what is there is the same? […]

Inconceivable as it seems to ordinary reason, you — and all other conscious beings as such — are all in all. Hence this life of yours which you are living is not merely a piece of the entire existence, but is in a certain sense the whole. […]

It is the vision of this truth (of which the individual is seldom conscious in his actions) which underlies all morally valuable activity."
(Erwin Schrödinger, My View of the World, 1951)

E3.5.2.a_REF6_PH "OFTEN, WHEN WE SAY, “I LOVE YOU” WE FOCUS MOSTLY ON THE IDEA OF THE “I” WHO IS DOING THE LOVING AND LESS ON THE QUALITY OF THE LOVE THAT’S BEING OFFERED. This is because we are caught by the idea of self. We think we have a self. But there is no such thing as an individual separate self. A flower is made only of non-flower elements, such as chlorophyll, sunlight, and water. If we were to remove all the non-flower elements from the flower, there would be no flower left. A flower cannot be by herself alone. A flower can only inter-be with all of us… Humans are like this too. We can’t exist by ourselves alone. We can only inter-be. I am made only of non-me elements, such as the Earth, the sun, parents, and ancestors. In a relationship, if you can see the nature of interbeing between you and the other person, you can see that his suffering is your own suffering, and your happiness is his own happiness. With this way of seeing, you speak and act differently. This in itself can relieve so much suffering."
(Thich Nhat Hanh, How to Love)

E3.5.2.a_REF7_SOC THE FOUR ONTOLOGIES.
"It may seem surprising to see a dualism of the person, now somewhat discredited, acquire a universality previously denied to the dualism of nature and culture. However, there is no shortage of empirical arguments, as we have said, to justify such a privilege, notably the fact that the awareness of a distinction between the interiority and physicality of the self seems to be an innate ability attested to by all lexicons, while the terminological equivalents of the nature/culture pair are difficult to find outside European languages and do not appear to have any experimentally demonstrable cognitive basis. But above all, it must be said here that, contrary to popular opinion, binary oppositions are not inventions of the West or fictions of structural anthropology, that they are widely used by all peoples in many circumstances, and that it is therefore less their form that should be questioned than the possible universality of the contents they divide. [...]

The combinations allowed by the combination of interiority and physicality are very limited: when faced with any other being, human or non-human, I can assume either that it possesses elements of physicality and interiority identical to my own, or that its interiority and physicality are distinct from my own, or that we have similar interiorities and heterogeneous physicalities, or finally that our interiorities are different and our physicalities analogous. I will call the first combination “totemism,” the second “analogism,” the third “animism,” and the last “naturalism”. These principles of identification define four major types of ontology, that is, systems of properties of existing things, which serve as anchors for contrasting forms of cosmologies, models of social bonds, and theories of identity and otherness."
(Philippe Descola, Beyond Nature and Culture, 2005)

Similarity of inner qualities + Difference in physical qualities = Animism
Similarity of inner qualities + Similarity of physical qualities = Totemism
Difference in inner qualities + Similarity of physical qualities = Naturalism
Difference in inner qualities + Difference in physical qualities = Analogism.

E3.5.2.b. The Path of Freedom: How does the universal self act? Through "de-creation", "active participation", and "becoming what we are not".

E1.7.C.3.6.b_REF1_PH.wE3.5.2.b. "MEANING OF THE UNIVERSE

We are a part which has to imitate the whole.

The atman. Let the soul of a man take the whole universe for its body. Let its relation to the whole universe be like that of a collector to his collection

[...] We should identify ourselves with the universe itself. Everything that is less than the universe is subject to suffering.

Even though I die, the universe continues. That does not console me if I am anything other than the universe. If, however, the universe is, as it were, another body to my soul, my death ceases to have any more importance for me than that of a stranger. The same is true of my sufferings.

Let the whole universe be for me, in relation to my body, what the stick of a blind man is in relation to his hand. His sensibility is really no longer in his hand but at the end of the stick. An apprenticeship is necessary.

[...] To change the relationship between ourselves and the world in the same way as, through apprenticeship, the workman changes the relationship between himself and the tool. Getting hurt: this is the trade entering into the body. May all suffering make the universe enter into the body.\

Habit, skill: a transference of the consciousness into an object other than the body itself.

[...] We do not become detached, we change our attachment. We must attach ourselves to the all.

We have to feel the universe through each sensation. What does it matter then whether it be pleasure or pain? If our hand is shaken by a beloved friend when we meet again after a long separation, what does it matter that he squeezes it hard and hurts us?

[...] We have to associate the rhythm of the life of the body with that of the world, to feel this association constantly and to feel also the perpetual exchange of matter by which the human being bathes in the world.

Things which nothing can take from a human being as long as he lives: in the way of movement over which his will has a hold, respiration; in the way of perception, space (even in a dungeon, even with our eyes blinded and our ear-drums pierced, as long as we live we are aware of space).

We have to attach to these things the thoughts which we desire that no circumstances should be able to deprive us of."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)


E1.7.C.3.6.d.iv_REF1_PH "DECREATION

[...]  Creation is an act of love and it is perpetual. At each moment our existence is God’s love for us. But God can only love himself. His love for us is love for himself through us. Thus, he who gives us our being loves in us the acceptance of not being.

[...]  Relentless necessity, wretchedness, distress, the crushing burden of poverty and of labour which wears us out, cruelty, torture, violent death, constraint, disease—all these constitute divine love. It is God who in love withdraws from us so that we can love him. For if we were exposed to the direct radiance of his love, without
the protection of space, of time and of matter, we should be evaporated like water in the sun; there would not be enough ‘I’ in us to make it possible to surrender the ‘I’ for love’s sake. Necessity is the screen set between God and us so that we can be. It is for us to pierce through the screen so that we cease to be.

[...]  Renunciation. Imitation of God’s renunciation in creation. In a sense God renounces being everything. We should renounce being something. That is our only good.

Everything which is grasped by our natural faculties is hypothetical. It is only supernatural love that establishes anything. Thus we are co-creators.

We participate in the creation of the world by decreating ourselves.

[...]  We only possess what we renounce; what we do not renounce escapes from us. In this sense, we cannot possess anything whatever unless it passes through God.

[...]  For men of courage physical sufferings (and privations) are often a test of endurance and of strength of soul. But there is a better use to be made of them. For me then, may they not be that. May they rather be a testimony, lived and felt, of human misery. May I endure them in a completely passive manner. Whatever happens, how could I ever think an affliction too great, since the wound of an affliction and the abasement to which those whom it strikes are condemned opens to them the knowledge of human misery, knowledge which is the door of all wisdom?

But pleasure, happiness, prosperity, if we know how to recognize in them all that comes from outside (chance, circumstances, etc.), likewise bear testimony to human misery. They should be used in the same way. This applies even to grace, in so far as it is a sensible phenomenon.

We have to be nothing in order to be in our right place in the whole."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E1.7.C.3.6.d.ii_REF1.3_PH 

"THE SELF
[...] Everything without exception which is of value in me comes from somewhere other than myself, not as a gift but as a loan which must be ceaselessly renewed. Everything without exception which is in me is absolutely valueless; and, among the gifts which have come to me from elsewhere, everything which I appropriate becomes valueless immediately I do so.

Perfect joy excludes even the very feeling of joy, for in the soul filled by the object no corner is left for saying ‘I’. We cannot imagine such joys when they are absent, thus the incentive for seeking them is lacking."
(Simone Weil, Gravity and Grace, 1947)

E3.5.2.b_REF1_PH "THE VIRTUOUS AND KNOWLEDGEABLE MAN HAS AN EGO OF VIRTUE AND AN EGO OF KNOWLEDGE. It is this sattvic ego that he strives to satisfy. He seeks virtue and knowledge for himself. However, real freedom comes only when we cease to satisfy the ego, to think and want from the ego, from the limited 'I' within us. In other words, supreme self-mastery and freedom begin when we see and hold the supreme Self above the natural self, for whom the ego is an obstructing veil and an impenetrable shadow. This can only happen when we see the one Self in us, above nature. We must make our individual being one with Him in being and consciousness. Then, it will no longer act on its own, but as the instrument of a supreme Will—the only Will that is truly free"
(The Bhagavad Gita, Chapter Fourteen — Above the Gunas, translation by Jean Herbert; commentary by Aurobindo).

E1.7.C.3.6.d.iv_REF2_PH.wE3.5.2.b.

NICOLAS GRIMALDI ARGUES THAT TRUE FREEDOM IS FOUND NOT IN NIHILISM OR SELF-INTEREST, BUT IN AN ACTIVE "ABNEGATION" THAT SHEDS THE ISOLATING OBSESSION WITH OUR PRECARIOUS "SINGULARITY," allowing us to escape the prison of desire and participate in a "vaster life" of universal truth and eternal communion.
"Beyond desire and time, amazed to exist, active and carefree—such is the freedom of which various wisdoms speak. However, this freedom is opposed to the most spontaneous tendencies of each individual, the domineering and predatory attitude that technology prolongs, and the mirror games without which society could no longer exist. Thus, is this freedom not a subtle form of nihilism, shielding us from both the demands of life and those of society? However, self-denial is not nihilism. It is not even renunciation. On the contrary, it is the simple negation within us of all the negations that tend to destroy us. If it refuses to take the side of the individual, it is because it has taken the side of a broader life.
Yet, such an experience is less exceptional than it seems. Although contemplation is required, withdrawal is not. Almost everyone has sensed it, recognized it, felt called to it, and promised to devote their lives to it at one time or another.
Sometimes, an earthquake of history strips us of all the appearances we believed to be inseparable from our identity. By turning us into former beings, it reveals a truth we spent our time hiding from ourselves: we die as we are born—in essential destitution and poverty—and everything not devoted to the service of life is lost in the meantime.
[...] For the life of the spirit is freedom itself. Spinoza believed that knowledge of the truth gives us access to freedom by allowing us to participate in the eternal understanding of the infinite. However, more than temporality, it is solitude from which the experience of truth frees us. In it, we experience ourselves as more deeply and indissolubly united with others through the universality of what possesses us than with ourselves through the particularity of what we possess. Thus, an unbreakable community can be founded on the universality of truth and the joy of eternal communion based on this community's principles.
However, as with Spinoza, this joy would merely be intellectual if we did not feel ourselves participating in a greater life that grounds and justifies our own. Spinoza invites us to recognize infinite understanding as the original reflexivity through which the eternal simplicity of God becomes life. Each of us feels this principle of life's universal prodigality within ourselves, and we are free to make ourselves mediators of it. 
Only our ordinary concern for our individuality prevents us from abandoning ourselves to it. This concern imprisons us in desire and its contradictions. This concern also turns our irremediable incompleteness into loneliness. However, when an excess of ingenuity or lucidity renders our precarious and transitory singularity indifferent or almost insubstantial, nothing that matters to others matters to us anymore. Only this spiritual life, to which every act of self-denial bears witness, manifests a freedom in time that is free from the ambiguities of temporality.
Note:
(1) Ashtâvakra, op. cit., XIII, 3, p. 47: "Nothing can be accomplished. When one has deeply understood this, whatever one has to accomplish, one is always serene." "
(Nicolas Grimaldi, The Ambiguities of Freedom, 1999)

E3.5.2.b_REF2_PH BY WRITING THAT DESIRE IS THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF APPETITE, OR OF THE NEED EXPRESSED BY THE BODY, SPINOZA WANTS TO TELL US THAT IT IS POSSIBLE TO CONTINUALLY INCREASE OUR COMMITMENT TO LIFE. This is not about drilling down into a private ego, but raising the self to a "higher power" where we participate in the "infinite affirmation of Being."
"Taking ideas as images, as Descartes does, confuses the knowledge of the understanding with the mutilated and confused knowledge of the imagination. Every idea is an affirmation, an act of definition and determination; therefore, it is a conception, not a simple vision of a form, even if it is the pure ideality of thought. Those who make ideas consist of the images formed by the encounter of bodies regard ideas as silent paintings on a panel. With this prejudice occupying their minds, they fail to see that an idea, insofar as it is an idea, envelops an affirmation or negation" (Scholium to the demonstration of the corollary of Proposition 49 of Book II).

So what of desire, which is appetite with self-awareness? Spinoza most often uses a singular expression to refer to consciousness, which, to my knowledge, belongs to him alone: the idea that has become conscious of itself is 'the idea of the idea.' Spinoza uses this formula to mean that in order to become conscious of itself, an idea must become the object of a higher-order idea. In this sense, consciousness is a metapsychology—a reflection on psychology itself—in the same way that we speak of "metalinguistics" or "metaeconomics." Thus, a reflection on the geometric order adopted in Ethics constitutes a kind of "meta-Ethics" (the outline of which can be found in the Treatise on the Reform of the Understanding). Spinoza asserts that intellectual evidence is never perfect vision by preferring the formula "idea of the idea" to the word "consciousness" adopted by philosophical tradition. Rather, there are infinite degrees of consciousness depending on whether one rises to the level of the idea of the idea or the idea of the idea of the idea and so on ad infinitum. Thus, contrary to Descartes's claim, there is no such thing as a perfect act of consciousness except in God, expressed through the attribute of thought. As we are only a part of immense nature, our consciousness is always and necessarily partial and therefore always perfectible. In this sense, the idea of the idea can be considered the idea raised to the power of two, and the continuation of this power immediately affirms its infinity and the possibility of raising the idea to the power of n as n approaches infinity. Thus, we can think of the exaltation of the spirit that takes place in God. By writing that desire is the consciousness of appetite, or the need expressed by the body, Spinoza tells us that we can infinitely intensify our consciousness of our body and elevate our adherence to life, as expressed by our individuality, despite being only a part of Nature.

Thus, our adherence to Being can grow in intensity without limit. Since life, which is in God or Nature, has no other purpose than itself, living and existing are the names of the Absolute. Therefore, in animals endowed with consciousness, living is an act capable of asserting itself more and more and exalting itself in the knowledge of its own power. However, the mind is not free to act as it pleases since all our actions are determined by dense causality, which leaves no room for emptiness. Nature is the full expression of the creative infinity in God. This is why ethics does not prescribe the principles to which virtuous actions must adhere; rather, it guides us to become increasingly aware of the necessity of our individual existence. The more aware we are of the conatus that lifts us up and makes us live, the more we adhere to the life that blossoms in our unique individuality and personality. We cannot change the course of things, but we can approve of it and participate in its creative momentum. We can enjoy this infinite affirmation of being that surrounds and animates us: "This doctrine is useful in that it teaches us that we act by the sole gesture of God and participate in the divine nature. This is especially true as we perform more perfect actions and know God better" (Ethics, II, scholium of prop. 49; GF, III, p. 131)."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of This World, 4- “Desire is the very essence of man,” 2017)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd4.html

E3.5.2.b_REF2.1_PH THE HIGHEST KNOWLEDGE, WHICH IS REASON, KNOWS THE PART THROUGH THE WHOLE. IT DOES SO BY ADJUSTING EACH OF THE INDIVIDUAL PARTITIONS IN THE SYMPHONY AS A WHOLE. This is different from knowing the whole through the sequence of parts. The latter is an understanding of a succession of propositions, but not an intuition of the totality. The "I" is then actually the activity of the Whole flowing through a specific point.
"Perhaps we are now in a better position to understand what it means for participation in universal life to abound on Earth as it does in the universe. Spinoza writes, "All things are animated to varying degrees" (II, 13, scholium). This means that all things, from stones to humans, are lifted up by the momentum of conatus, which is the life of God—or rather, the activity of the living God, who is existence itself. In what sense is this infinite and living necessity not contradictory to the experience of freedom? On the contrary, it is the very object of freedom. The body and the mind are not limited to themselves, but are open to immensity. They express their power to act all the more because of this openness. The body's range of action expands in an environment without which it could not live. The mind thinks in an intellectual environment that nourishes and stimulates it. According to Spinoza, freedom does not consist of an act that opposes nature. Through this act, one aims to tame nature and subject it to one's own interests. Rather, freedom consists of participating in the immanent dynamism that lifts up the universe. This participation occurs not through the will to transform the universe, but rather through the will to commune with the infinite life that runs through and traverses it. Therefore, freedom cannot consist in the negation of necessity. On the contrary, freedom is pure affirmation; there is nothing negative about it. Freedom consists in affirming this necessity and joyfully participating in the divine necessity that never ceases to recreate the world. This necessity has no other purpose than expressing its infinite, eternal, and gratuitous nature. [...]

As part of nature, man is nature itself, immersed in the vast universe. Freedom is the experience of necessity—an inner necessity that expresses itself through the unfolding of one's ability to act according to one's own degree and an outer necessity that results from the pressure of events, which puts one in a position to act. Freedom does not consist of indifference to choice, but rather, it consists of the extreme determination of the act. I am free because I have no choice; I am free to the extent that I know the world. This knowledge is similar to how a swimmer knows the waves: through intuitive, non-discursive knowledge. It is a knowledge that comes at a glance, not through a step-by-step demonstration. The highest knowledge, reason, knows the part through the whole by adjusting each individual part to the symphony as a whole. It does not know the whole through the sequence of parts, which is understanding—a succession of propositions, but not an intuition of the totality."
(Jacques Darriulat, Spinoza and the Fullness of This World, 4- “Desire is the very essence of man,” 2017)

Read the full essay in French: http://www.jdarriulat.net/Auteurs/Spinoza/Introduction/Introd4.html

E3.5.2.b_REF3_PH "INDIVIDUATION
The process of becoming an individual who is different from everyone else. But why should we become what we already are from birth through our bodies? Why should we care so much about our own uniqueness? Rather than becoming what we are, as Nietzsche and Pindar suggest, it is about becoming what we are not. This involves opening ourselves up to others and the universal, which is only possible through the mind. It is no longer a principle of individuation, but rather, a principle of decentering and the mark of accomplished individuation"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E3.6. The Self as Narrative: "Read Yourself as a Fiction". The self we know is a story we construct.

E3.6.1. The Biological Narrator. How the brain constructs the "I" as a survival mechanism. The "self" is a "default mode" narrative generated by the brain to create continuity out of chaos, ensuring survival and social cohesion.

E3.6.1_REF1_PO THE BRAIN'S "DEFAULT MODE NETWORK," DISCOVERED BY MARCUS RAICHLE, CREATES OUR SENSE OF SELF BY RUNNING A RATIONAL, "LOW-ENTROPY" STORY, WHICH SUGGESTS THAT THE "HIGH-ENTROPY" VISIONARY EXPERIENCES OF PEOPLE LIKE WILLIAM BLAKE FEEL "MORE REAL" PRECISELY BECAUSE THIS SELF-NETWORK IS SUPPRESSED.

“In the twenty-first century, science has made great advances in understanding how the brain generates its sense of self. In 2001, the American neurologist Marcus Raichle started recording the mind ‘at rest’ when he was studying the brain with fMRI scanners at Washington University. His aim was to help calibrate the machine and to understand the differences in brain activity caused by performing mental tasks. To his surprise, he discovered that patients’ brains didn’t just go quiet when they were lying back and doing nothing. Instead, several specific brain sections lit up and started communicating with each other. What that mental activity was about was not immediately obvious, but those brain regions were clearly communicating about something.

The functions of the brain areas in question related to autobiographical information, such as remembering the past and predicting the future, or thinking about other people and predicting how they might behave. These are all brain functions needed for daydreaming, so it makes sense that they would be active when people were lying back and letting their mind wander. This network of brain areas has now been given the somewhat dull name of the ‘default mode network’ – the network which becomes active by default when we didn’t seem to be doing anything specific.

What Raichle had discovered was the structure of the brain’s high-level, top-down organising network. Some researchers refer to the default mode network as a ‘task-negative network’ because it goes quiet when the brain has a specific task that it needs to pay attention to, and only starts up again when the job is done. It is when the brain is intensely focused on a task that the default network becomes sufficiently quiet for the selfless ‘flow’ state to be experienced. There is an exception to this general rule, which is that the default mode network also becomes active during tasks that require access to our autobiographical memories or social understanding. This makes sense, because the combined actions of the areas of the default mode network are our current best neurological model for how the brain constructs that most elusive of things: our sense of self.

The sense of self has long been a tricky problem for philosophers, psychiatrists and neuroscientists alike. We all think we have a sense of self and intuitively believe that it therefore must exist, but it has proven frustratingly difficult to find, or even define. As children, we might assume that our eyes operate like windows, letting light into our heads and allowing our ‘self’ to see the world outside. But how exactly would this work? Is ‘the self’ like a little person who watches this information, as if on a TV screen, with eyes of their own? If that was the case, would that little person also have another person inside their head, in order to watch what was going on in front of their eyes? That person would then need an even smaller person inside them, and so on to absurdity.

Neurologists have diced and sliced the brain pretty finely and there is no little person to be found, nor indeed any singular part of the brain which seems to act like one. Our sense of self is not a discrete thing, it turns out. It is perhaps better thought of as a story. It is the story of who we are, what we are like and where we are going, and as such it grows out of our history, our relationships with others and our goals for the future. All this is an emergent quality that arises from the interplay of many different areas of the brain, of which the most prominent are the same that make up our default mode network. It is when these areas are communicating that the story of ourselves can be told and our sense of self can be said to exist.

If it is the case that a profound spiritual feeling of unity is the result of a reduction in the brain’s sense of self, then this has significant implications for another hallmark of the visionary experience. Those who have had visions frequently claim that the experience was in some way more real than normal life. They often view the immaterial spiritual realm that they have encountered as a more fundamental state of reality than our everyday world of matter. This was very much Blake’s opinion, and it was also the conclusion of countless mystical seekers going back centuries, from the mystery schools of the ancient world onwards. Outside the West, however, this is not always the case. In Buddhism, for example, visions are valued, but it is accepted that they may be delusions and the product of the imagination.

Is this sense of things being ‘more real’ simply a side effect of the absence of a self? When you are present and self-aware you are able to question what is going on around you, and apply doubts and criticisms where necessary. But when the self is absent there is no ‘you’ to question anything, so all that there is can only be accepted as unarguable and true. The voice that questions whether this is nothing more than a dream is no longer present.

Given our current understanding of consciousness – or rather, our lack of it – a suggestion like this remains speculative. It may, in fact, be that the reason why visionary states feel more real than the everyday world is because that is exactly what they are, and mystics and visionaries are genuinely gaining access to the unfiltered experience of a more fundamental reality. However, for those sceptical of such a position, the suggestion that it is the absence of a sense of self which causes this belief can be a helpful one. The idea that Blake’s visions convinced him that there was a greater reality than the material world can then be accepted, without having to also accept that this was true. With this intellectual hang-up neatly sidestepped, we are free to examine Blake’s visions and explore what it is about them that is of value.

The default mode network helps us to understand how the physical world works, allowing us to make reliable predictions about what is likely to happen next. It is a stubbornly practical and rational system, and as such it is not interested in populating our material environment with characters from the imagination. The default mode network cuts out a lot of unstructured chatter between different parts of the brain and is therefore a highly efficient way for a brain to function. As a result, our imagination can be constrained by the default mode network. It can become subservient to what we know about the world.

If you imagine that the connections between different brain regions are a map of the road network, then the default mode network is like the motorway network – the busiest, strongest and most used connections, and the fastest and most efficient way to go from A to B. Deliberately using the motorways to travel is more efficient than heading down country lanes at random, with no clear destination in mind, just to see what we might find.

We are not born with a default mode network. Babies’ brains are like blank slates, and they are ready to learn and adapt to whatever time and place they find themselves in. This explains why people have no memory of their first years, because autobiographical information requires the default mode network to develop. Gradually, as babies grow, their default mode networks start to emerge and strengthen, and they begin to understand the world around them and their place within it. Our first long-term memories form between the age of two and four. Once we have a memory, we can begin to understand ourselves as a story that is acting out in time.

While the child brain is developing, and the emerging default mode network is still weak, it is less rational and structured than an adult brain. As a result, the imagination is less constrained. We see this in the phenomenon of imaginary friends, in which a non-existent companion is conjured so strongly that the child perceives them as real. It is tempting to see a similarity here with Blake’s ‘twofold vision’, in which intense imagination leads to a weakened sense of self that results in imagined entities being perceived as externally present. It is rare for an adult to get into an argument with a thistle, but it would be less surprising for a child.

In child development terms, imaginary childhood friends are believed to be a positive phenomenon that can lead to improved social, linguistic and creative skills. There is evidence from surveys in UK nurseries, however, that imaginary childhood friends have become rarer in recent years. Children now have far less opportunity to be bored, and with less time in their busy schedules for unstructured play and daydreaming they are less likely to invent characters so rich and interesting that they pass as real. Blame for this is sometimes placed on the use of tablets by pre-school children. It is possible that the use of screens is helping children learn about the world and causing their default mode networks to strengthen earlier, while at the same time reducing their need to flex their imaginations.

The adult mind is, in a sense, in a rut. Once it knows what is likely to happen in the world, it does not usually bother itself imagining scenarios that do not fall into this pattern. A child who has yet to develop a fully formed default mode network may spend time imagining what their life would be like if they had a pet dinosaur they could ride to school and impress their friends with. An adult, in contrast, will think about what they need from the shops and what to watch on Netflix that evening. On one level, this is a much more practical and energy-efficient use of the brain, but it may not be the way to a richer, more fulfilling life.

In a 2014 paper called ‘The Entropic Brain’, a team of researchers led by Robin Carhart-Harris from Imperial College London looked at the consequences of what they called ‘entropy’. In this context, the word ‘entropy’ referred to how chaotic or ordered the activity in the brain was, with chaotic, unexpected brain activity being classed as high entropy and calm, predictable brain patterns being classed as low entropy. Carhart-Harris’s argument is that the brain has evolved to limit entropy as much as possible, in order to run efficiently. As he explained in his paper, the brain tries ‘to promote realism, foresight, careful reflection and an ability to recognize and overcome wishful and paranoid fantasies’. It does this through several top-down brain networks, with the default mode network being a prominent example. These try to keep the brain running in a predictable and monotonous way with as little wild or unnecessary activity as possible.”
(John Higgs, William Blake vs The World, 2021)

E3.6.1_REF2_TH KNOWING YOURSELF OR TELLING YOUR STORY? OUR DUAL AWARENESS SYSTEM
Anyone who enters talk therapy, however, almost immediately confronts the limitations of language. This was true of my own psychoanalysis. While I talk easily and can tell interesting tales, I quickly realized how difficult it was to feel my feelings deeply and simultaneously report them to someone else. When I got in touch with the most intimate, painful, or confusing moments of my life, I often found myself faced with a choice: I could either focus on reliving old scenes in my mind’s eye and let myself feel what I had felt back then, or I could tell my analyst logically and coherently what had transpired. When I chose the latter, I would quickly lose touch with myself and start to focus on his opinion of what I was telling him. The slightest hint of doubt or judgment would shut me down, and I would shift my attention to regaining his approval.
Since then neuroscience research has shown that we possess two distinct forms of self-awareness: one that keeps track of the self across time and one that registers the self in the present moment. The first, our autobiographical self, creates connections among experiences and assembles them into a coherent story. This system is rooted in language. Our narratives change with the telling, as our perspective changes and as we incorporate new input.
The other system, moment-to-moment self-awareness, is based primarily in physical sensations, but if we feel safe are not rushed, we can find words to communicate that experience as well. These two ways of knowing are localized in different parts of the brain that are largely disconnected from each other. Only the system devoted to self-awareness, which is based in the medial prefrontal cortex, can change the emotional brain.”
(Bessel Van Der Kalk, The Body Keeps the Score, 2014)

E3.6.1_REF3_PSI THE SELF ILLUSION: HOW OUR SOCIAL BRAIN CONSTRUCTS WHO WE ARE
"Each morning, we wake up and experience a rich explosion of consciousness — the bright morning sunlight, the smell of roast coffee and, for some of us, the warmth of the person lying next to us in bed. As the slumber recedes into the night, we awake to become who we are. The morning haze of dreams and oblivion disperses and lifts as recognition and recall bubble up the content of our memories into our consciousness. For the briefest of moments we are not sure who we are and then suddenly ‘I,’ the one that is awake, awakens. We gather our thoughts so that the ‘I’ who is conscious becomes the ‘me’ — the person with a past. The memories of the previous day return. The plans for the immediate future reformulate. The realization that we have things to get on with remind us that it is a workday. We become a person whom we recognize.
The call of nature tells us it is time to visit the bathroom and en route we glance at the mirror. We take a moment to reflect. We look a little older, but we are still the same person who has looked in that same mirror every day since we moved in. We see our self in that mirror. This is who we are.
The daily experience of the self is so familiar, and yet the brain science shows that this sense of the self is an illusion. Psychologist Susan Blackmore makes the point that the word ‘illusion’ does not mean that it does not exist — rather, an illusion is not what it seems. We all certainly experience some form of self, but what we experience is a powerful depiction generated by our brains for our own benefit."
(Bruce Hood, The Self Illusion: How the Social Brain Creates Identity)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2012/05/31/the-self-illusion-bruce-hood/


“For lack of anything better, you too will give thanks to the memory that every morning associates
the reflection of this stranger in the mirror with images that still move,
the memory that anchors him to the shores of a hinterland that he takes, for better or worse, as his own.”
(Michel Baglin, L’Alcool des vents, 2010)


"Faute de mieux, tu rendras grâce toi aussi à la mémoire qui associe chaque matin
le reflet de cet étranger dans la glace à des images qui bougent encore,
la mémoire qui l’ancre aux rivages d’un arrière-pays qu’il prend vaille que vaille pour le sien."
(Michel Baglin, L’Alcool des vents, 2010)

E3.6.1_REF4_PSI "LIFE AS A STORY [...]
A story is about significant events and memorable moments, not about time passing. Duration neglect is normal in a story, and the ending often defines its character. The same core features appear in the rules of narratives and in the memories of colonoscopies, vacations, and films. This is how the remembering self works: it composes stories and keeps them for future reference. [...]

The psychologist Ed Diener and his students wondered whether duration neglect and the peak-end rule would govern evaluations of entire lives. They used a short description of the life of a fictitious character called Jen, never-married woman with no children, who died instantly and painlessly in an automobile accident. In one version of Jen's story, she was extremely happy throughout her life (which lasted either 30 or 60 years), enjoying her work, taking vacations, spending time with her friends and on her hobbies. Another version added 5 extra years to Jens life, who now died either when she was 35 or 65. The extra years were described as pleasant but less so than before. After reading a schematic biography of Jen, each participant answered two questions: “Taking her life as a whole, how desirable do you think Jen’s life was?” and “How much total happiness or unhappiness would you say that Jen experienced in her life?” 

The results provided clear evidence of both duration neglect and a peak-end effect. In a between-subjects experiment (different participants saw different forms), doubling the duration of Jen’s life had no effect whatsoever on the desirability of her life, or on judgments of the total happiness that Jen experienced. Clearly, her life was represented by a prototypical slice of time, not as a sequence of time slices. As a consequence, her “total happiness” was the happiness of a typical period in her lifetime, not the sum (or integral) of happiness over the duration of her life."
(Daniel Kahneman, Thinking Fast and Slow, 2011)

E1.7.B.3.2_REF3_SCI.wE3.6.1.


"What Your Brain Is Doing When You’re Not Doing Anything
When your mind is wandering, your brain’s “default mode” network is active. [...]
According to research, the effects of the default mode network include mind wandering, remembering past experiences, thinking about others’ mental states, envisioning the future and processing language. While this may seem like a grab bag of unrelated aspects of cognition, Vinod Menon, the director of the Stanford Cognitive & Systems Neuroscience Laboratory, recently theorized that all of these functions may be helpful in constructing an internal narrative. In his view, the default mode network helps you think about who you are in relation to others, recall your past experiences and then wrap up all of that into a coherent self-narrative."
(Nora Bradford, Quanta Magazine, February 5, 2024)

Read the full article:
https://www.quantamagazine.org/what-your-brain-is-doing-when-youre-not-doing-anything-20240205/?mc_cid=0f25eb2815&mc_eid=de38e9b771


I_Kristina Armitage_Quanta Magazine_Default mode

E3.6.1_REF5_LIT "THE INSTANT WE WAKE THE STORY BEGINS: 'HERE I AM. IN MY BED...' 
"Nothing, not one thing, hurts us more — or causes us to hurt others more — than our certainties. The stories we tell ourselves about the world and the foregone conclusions with which we cork the fount of possibility are the supreme downfall of our consciousness. They are also the inevitable cost of survival, of navigating a vast and complex reality most of which remains forever beyond our control and comprehension. And yet in our effort to parse the world, we sever ourselves from the full range of its beauty, tensing against the tenderness of life."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

"The instant we wake the story begins: “Here I am. In my bed. Hard worker, good dad, decent husband, a guy who always tries his best. Jeez, my back hurts. Probably from the stupid gym.”

And just like that, with our thoughts, the world gets made.

Or, anyway, a world gets made.

This world-making via thinking is natural, sane, Darwinian: we do it to survive. Is there harm in it? Well, yes, because we think in the same way that we hear or see: within a narrow, survival-enhancing range. We don’t see or hear all that might be seen or heard but only that which is helpful for us to see and hear. Our thoughts are similarly restricted and have a similarly narrow purpose: to help the thinker thrive.

All of this limited thinking has an unfortunate by-product: ego. Who is trying to survive? “I” am. The mind takes a vast unitary wholeness (the universe), selects one tiny segment of it (me), and starts narrating from that point of view. Just like that, that entity (George!) becomes real, and he is (surprise, surprise) located at the exact center of the universe, and everything is happening in his movie, so to speak; it is all, somehow, both for and about him. In this way, moral judgment arises: what is good for George is… good. What is bad for him is bad. (The bear is neither good nor bad until, looking hungry, it starts walking toward George.)

So, in every instant, a delusional gulf gets created between things as we think they are and things as they actually are. Off we go, mistaking the world we’ve made with our thoughts for the real world. Evil and dysfunction (or at least obnoxiousness) occur in proportion to how solidly a person believes that his projections are correct and energetically acts upon them."
(George Saunders, A Swim in a Pond in the Rain: In Which Four Russians Give a Master Class on Writing, Reading, and Life, 2021)

E3.6.2. The Shadow Narratives: The "Unlived Lives" that haunt the story we tell. How our identity is defined not just by what we do, but by the obsession with what we didn't do, and how frustration shapes our desire.

E3.6.2_REF1_LIT AN INVENTED WORD TO DESCRIBE THE MOMENT OF REALIZATION THAT YOUR QUINTESSENTIAL FUTURE SELF ISN’T EVER GOING TO SHOW UP
“the meantime  n. the moment of realization that your quintessential future self isn’t ever going to show up, which forces the role to fall upon the understudy, the gawky kid for whom nothing is easy, who spent years mouthing their lines in the wings before being shoved into the glare of your life, which is already well into its second act.”
(John Koenig, The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows, 2021)

E3.6.2_REF2_TH "In Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, [...] Adam Phillips  examines the paradoxical relationship between frustration and satisfaction, exploring how our unlived lives illuminate the priorities, values, and desires undergirding the lives we do live."
(Maria Popova's review of Adam Phillips' Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012 - in The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2015/08/17/missing-out-adam-phillips/

E3.6.2_REF2.1_TH "The unexamined life is surely worth living, but is the unlived life worth examining? It seems a strange question until one realizes how much of our so-called mental life is about the lives we are not living, the lives we are missing out on, the lives we could be leading but for some reason are not. What we fantasize about, what we long for, are the experiences, the things and the people that are absent. It is the absence of what we need that makes us think, that makes us cross and sad. We have to be aware of what is missing in our lives — even if this often obscures both what we already have and what is actually available — because we can survive only if our appetites more or less work for us. Indeed, we have to survive our appetites by making people cooperate with our wanting. We pressurize the world to be there for our benefit. And yet we quickly notice as children — it is, perhaps, the first thing we do notice — that our needs, like our wishes, are always potentially unmet. Because we are always shadowed by the possibility of not getting what we want, we learn, at best, to ironize our wishes — that is, to call our wants wishes: a wish is only a wish until, as we say, it comes true — and, at worst, to hate our needs. But we also learn to live somewhere between the lives we have and the lives we would like. […]

We refer to them as our unlived lives because somewhere we believe that they were open to us; but for some reason — and we might spend a great deal of our lived lives trying to find and give the reason — they were not possible. And what was not possible all too easily becomes the story of our lives. Indeed, our lived lives might become a protracted mourning for, or an endless tantrum about, the lives we were unable to live. But the exemptions we suffer, whether forced or chosen, make us who we are. [...]

We are always haunted by the myth of our potential, of what we might have it in ourselves to be or do… We share our lives with the people we have failed to be. […]

Our lives become an elegy to needs unmet and desires sacrificed, to possibilities refused, to roads not taken. The myth of our potential can make of our lives a perpetual falling-short, a continual and continuing loss, a sustained and sometimes sustaining rage."
(Adam Phillips, Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012)

E3.6.2_REF2.2_TH "Phillips argues that these unlived lives reveal themselves most obviously in our envy of others, the psychology of which Kierkegaard keenly observed a century and a half earlier, and in the demands we place on our children — an idea that furthers the parallel between Phillips with Jung, for it was the great Swiss psychiatrist who famously asserted that what most shapes children’s developing psychological reality are “the unlived lives of the parents.” But where Jung believed that “the sole purpose of human existence is to kindle a light in the darkness of mere being,” Phillips suggests that it’s equally important to kindle a light in the darkness of non-being, of never-having-been:

      'We have an abiding sense, however obscure and obscured, that the lives we do lead are informed by the lives that escape us.'

It is precisely by recognizing our existential incompleteness and our inherent insufficiency, by embracing the fact that we are a cosmic accident, that we can begin to feel the fullness of life — but this is hard to do, Phillips points out, in a culture predicated on inflating the specialness of the self as a singular unit aimed at optimizing and making maximally productive the lived life"
(Maria Popova's review of Adam Phillips' Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012 - in The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2015/08/17/missing-out-adam-phillips/

E3.6.2_REF2.3_TH "Because we are nothing special — on a par with ants and daffodils — it is the work of culture to make us feel special; just as parents need to make their children feel special to help them bear and bear with — and hopefully enjoy — their insignificance in the larger scheme of things. In this sense growing up is always an undoing of what needed to be done: first, ideally, we are made to feel special; then we are expected to enjoy a world in which we are not… When people realize how accidental they are, they are tempted to think of themselves as chosen. We certainly tend to be more special, if only to ourselves, in our (imaginary) unlived lives.

So it is worth wondering what the need to be special prevents us seeing about ourselves — other, that is, than the unfailing transience of our lives; what the need to be special stops us from being. This, essentially, is the question psychoanalysis was invented to address: what kind of pleasures can sustain a creature that is nothing special? Once the promise of immortality, of being chosen, was displaced by the promise of more life — the promise, as we say, of getting more out of life — the unlived life became a haunting presence in a life legitimated by nothing more than the desire to live it. For modern people, stalked by their choices, the good life is a life lived to the full. We become obsessed, in a new way, by what is missing in our lives; and by what sabotages the pleasures that we seek."
(Adam Phillips, Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012)

E3.6.2_REF2.4_TH I_Thomas More_Map of  the island of Utopia_1516

"To mitigate the wistful vestiges this existential neverland lodges in our psyche, Phillips argues, we create and hold on to various possible selves and possible lives — pockets of possibility that exist no matter how remote the probability of realizing them might be. These improbable possibles, Phillips asserts, come to both reveal and shape who we really are:

      'We make our lives pleasurable, and therefore bearable, by picturing them as they might be; it is less obvious, though, what these compelling fantasy lives — lives of, as it were, a more complete satisfaction — are a self-cure for. Our solutions tell us what our problems are; our fantasy lives are not — or not necessarily — alternatives to, or refuges from, those real lives but an essential part of them… There is nothing more obscure than the relationship between the lived and the unlived life. (Each member of a couple, for example, is always having a relationship, wittingly or unwittingly, with their partner’s unlived lives; their initial and initiating relationship is between what they assume are their potential selves.) So we may need to think of ourselves as always living a double life, the one that we wish for and the one that we practice; the one that never happens and the one that keeps happening. [...]
There is a gap between what we want and what we can have, and that gap … is our link, our connection, to the world… This discord, this supposed mismatch, is the origin of our experience of missing out. [...]
Our utopias tell us more about our lived lives, and their privations, than about our wished-for lives.'"
(Maria Popova's review of Adam Phillips' Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012 - in The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2015/08/17/missing-out-adam-phillips/

E3.6.2_REF2.5_TH "The paradox — and the most important point — is that it is through the privation of not getting what we want, as Nietzsche memorably argued more than a century earlier, that we arrive at the promise of satisfaction:

      'In our unlived lives we are always more satisfied, far less frustrated versions of ourselves… Our possibilities for satisfaction depend upon our capacity for frustration; if we can’t let ourselves feel our frustration — and, surprisingly, this is a surprisingly difficult thing to do — we can’t get a sense of what it is we might be wanting, and missing, of what might really give us pleasure… That frustration is where we start from; the child’s dawning awareness of himself is an awareness of something necessary not being there. The child becomes present to himself in the absence of something he needs.'

But it is through our frustrations that we come to know our wants, against the light of which the contour of our personhood is shaded in:

      'The more we frustrate ourselves in wanting something, the more we value our desire for it… Waiting too long poisons desire, but waiting too little pre-empts it; the imagining is in the waiting… Wanting takes time; partly because it takes some time to get over the resistances to wanting, and partly because we are often unconscious of what it is that we do want. But the worst thing we can be frustrated of is frustration itself; to be deprived of frustration is to be deprived of the possibilities of satisfaction.'"
(Maria Popova's review of Adam Phillips' Missing Out: In Praise of the Unlived Life, 2012 - in The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2015/08/17/missing-out-adam-phillips/

E3.6.3. When the fiction becomes a cage: The danger of mistaking the "map" for the "territory." What happens when we believe our story too rigidly: ego, depression, "ossification" of the persona, and the inability to evolve because we are trapped by labels.

E3.6.3_REF1_PO  ”“MISTAKE” IS ANOTHER WORD FOR A WORKING DRAFT WE ARE UNABLE OR UNWILLING TO REVISE, A DRAFT THAT STANDS AT ODDS WITH THE STORY WE WISH TO TELL ABOUT WHO WE ARE AND WHAT WE WANT. It is a judgment one part of us lashes on another. To indict as having chosen poorly what we once chose willingly is to renounce and dissociate from the substrate of us that did the choosing — a way of denying the stratified richness and complexity of being alive. In a truly integrated life, there are no mistakes — only experience, and the narrative we superimpose on experience to slip between our lips the sugar pill of coherence. There are as many possible stories to tell about an experience as there are ways to paint a cloud, to walk a forest, to love. […]
Where you are tender, you speak your plural. […]

from “ONE LOVE STORY, EIGHT TAKES”
by Brenda Shaughnessy

As it turns out, there is a wrong way to tell this story.
I was wrong to tell you how multi-true everything is,

when it would be truer to say nothing.
I’ve invented so much and prevented more.

But, I’d like to talk with you about other things,
in absolute quiet. In extreme context.

To see you again, isn’t love revision?
It could have gone so many ways.

This is just one of the ways it went.
Tell me another."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/10/03/eight-takes/?mc_cid=346d3edf87&mc_eid=0b6483decb

E3.6.3_REF2_CUR A_Rockwell Kent_Bowsprit_1930

“HOW NOT TO BE A VICTIM OF SUCCESS
A self is a personal mythos — a story through which we sieve the complexity and contradictions of lived experience for coherence. The cruelest price of success — that affirmation of the self by the world — is the way it can ossify the story of person, ensnare them into believing their own myth. In this regard, learning to live with your success can be as challenging as learning to live with your failure — both are continual acts of courage and resistance to the petrification of personhood into a selfing story, a refusal to measure your soul by the world’s estimation.”
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2025/10/09/rockwell-kent-success/?mc_cid=94ff04da88&mc_eid=0b6483decb

"Ezra Klein: You became big as a touring performer. You have these big records. You’re touring the world. You play stadiums. And this gets us to “Just Kids” and into your newer book: You decide to leave that behind, to move to Michigan with your partner and raise a family.

That’s quite a rare decision — to walk away from that kind of fame at that moment. And you have this line that I’ve been wondering about. You say: “After a time, if not prudent, one reaches a point of being unrecognizable to oneself.”

What about you or about your life had become unrecognizable to you?

Patti Smith: I was getting quite popular in Europe. You play in front of 40,000 people, and you get off the stage, and you’re wired up. It was exciting. I loved rock ’n’ roll. I liked being a rock ’n’ roll star for a while. But it wasn’t what I aspired to.

I wasn’t evolving as an artist. I wasn’t writing anymore. I wasn’t evolving as a human being. I’m not criticizing anything. I’m just simply saying this had to do with me. It wasn’t my goal in life to become a rich and famous rock star or become an arrogant [expletive].

I wanted to do something important, hopefully, or something of worth, and I felt like I had to really reassess who I was and what I wanted to do. I left public life behind so I could really get a sense of who I was, what I wanted and to evolve as a human being and to be with the person I loved.

It was a very difficult decision. Very difficult — even painful. But I’ve never regretted it. Because in those next 16 years, I did evolve. Which is also painful because with evolving, you have to shed a lot of things, and you have to reassess who you are, what you have done, where you’ve been careless, how you can be better and get a more empathetic sense of the world and the people around you.

So it was a long learning process."
(Ezra Klein, Interview with Patti Smith, November 18, 2025)

Listen to the podcast: https://www.nytimes.com/2025/11/18/opinion/ezra-klein-podcast-patti-smith.html?smid=url-share

E3.6.3_REF3_LIT THE ATTEMPTS OF HUMANS TO CREATE FALSE NAMES AND STORIES TO PLACE THEMSELVES IN THE WORLD
"CRISIS
[...] The waveform that overwhelms a maturing human being from the inside is the inescapable nature of their own flaws and weaknesses, their self-deceptions and their attempts to create false names and stories to place themselves in the world; the felt need to control the narrative of the story around them with no regard to outside revelation. The immense wave on the outside is the invitation to give that self to be borne off by the wave and renamed, revealed and re-ordered by the powerful flow."
(David Whyte, Consolations, The Solace, Nourishment and Underlying Meaning of Everyday Words, 2015)

E3.6.3_REF4_PH WHAT REALLY EXISTS | UNDER THE SURFACE - JIM CARREY

Jim Carrey argues that the personas we adopt are merely masks or characters rather than our true selves. He suggests that what we perceive as our individual identity—such as "Jim Carrey"—is a constructed cluster of ideas, names, and labels that do not truly exist. Carrey connects this realization to the experience of depression, proposing that it stems from the exhausting effort of trying to maintain a specific image or "avatar" for the world. Ultimately, he posits that true freedom and relief come from letting go of this egoic attachment, recognizing that we are already complete when viewing life simply as a "play of form" to be experienced without the heavy burden of a false self.

Watch on YouTube :
https://youtu.be/TucyzpHDNlE

E3.6.3_REF5_CUR WHEN WE MISTAKE THE STORY ("I AM A WRITER," "I AM A DOCTOR") FOR THE REALITY, WE ARE TRAPPED.
"We are makers of our own myths, but the more we live into them, the more we risk becoming their captives. All creativity rests upon unbelieving our own myths — seeing the world and our place in it afresh over and over, so that we may go on making what has not been made before, remaking ourselves in the process. Burnout is simply what a creative person experiences when they have begun believing their own myth too much. E.E. Cummings hinted at this in his exquisite observation that “the Artist is no other than he who unlearns what he has learned, in order to know himself.” Because the work of self-knowledge is never-ending, to trap ourselves into a static myth of who we are and what we do is to doom ourselves to creative death."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

"We usually define ourselves by what we do: I’m a writer. Or I’m a doctor. Or I’m a dancer. Whatever it is. Or I do construction. That’s usually how we define ourselves. There’s a big trip with all of that. […]

Buddhism really promotes the truth and the fact that the human being really has limitless possibilities. And that the core of what we are is not that thing that we normally define ourselves as. The core of what we are is a human being. And when we define ourselves as a human being, it changes everything. So music now, I look at it from the standpoint of being a human being and use that as the foundation. And then I use what I do to translate what initiates from my humanity into musical terms. That’s why I’m able to make every record be different from every other record."
(Herbie Hancock, More Songwriters on Songwriting)

E3.6.3_REF6_PH BARTHES ARGUES THAT WE SPEAK "ONE SINGLE AND SAME DISCOURSE UNTIL OUR DEATH." THIS "OBSTINACY OF DISCOURSE" IS THE CONTINUITY OF THE SELF. He suggests that what we call "I" is essentially a lifelong monologue that refuses to be interrupted.

“MAKING A SPEECH

”SO, I WAS SAYING..."

These are the words with which someone I know invariably begins each of his analysis sessions. From this story—or rather, this epiphany—came the realization of a brilliant and impressive trait. I want to introduce this idea right away. We persist; we always continue the same discourse. Those around us need a lot of patience to endure this repetitive discourse, this imperturbable discourse that accompanies us throughout our lives. We speak the same discourse until we die; death is the only power that can interrupt our persistence. Discourse is never castrated. It begins again and is reborn. This friend has the courage to make this obstinacy explicit three times a week with the help of an unusual listener: the analyst. [...]

Question: Are there elements in life that cause discourse to break down? Conversions? There may be a conversion of objects, but not of discourse."
(Roland Barthes, How to Live Together: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1976–1977)

E3.6.3_REF7_PSI I_Olivier Tallec_ Illustration from What If_(1) ; I_Olivier Tallec_ Illustration from What If_(2)

SAUNDERS DEFINES THE MECHANISM OF THE FICTIONAL SELF: THE MIND REPLACES REALITY WITH A "THEORY." We live in the map (the story), not the territory (the world).
"All models of reality are drawn by an imagination filtered through our fears and our hopes in a proportion mediated by our conditioning, which is always the function of story. It is the stories we believe that shape what we become, shape what the world is. In an age when commercial media have become the great conditioning engine of society, selling models of reality because they are profitable and not because they are true, it matters all the more what stories we believe, and what we resist."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)


"In the beginning, there’s a blank mind. Then that mind gets an idea in it, and the trouble begins, because the mind mistakes the idea for the world. Mistaking the idea for the world, the mind formulates a theory and, having formulated a theory, feels inclined to act.

Because the idea is always only an approximation of the world, whether that action will be catastrophic or beneficial depends on the distance between the idea and the world.

Mass media’s job is to provide this simulacra of the world, upon which we build our ideas. There’s another name for this simulacra-building: storytelling. [...]

The best stories proceed from a mysterious truth-seeking impulse that narrative has when revised extensively; they are complex and baffling and ambiguous; they tend to make us slower to act, rather than quicker. They make us more humble, cause us to empathize with people we don’t know, because they help us imagine these people, and when we imagine them — if the storytelling is good enough — we imagine them as being, essentially, like us. If the story is poor, or has an agenda, if it comes out of a paucity of imagination or is rushed, we imagine those other people as essentially unlike us: unknowable, inscrutable, inconvertible. [...]

A culture capable of imagining complexly is a humble culture. It acts, when it has to act, as late in the game as possible, and as cautiously, because it knows its own girth and the tight confines of the china shop it’s blundering into. And it knows that no matter how well-prepared it is — no matter how ruthlessly it has held its projections up to intelligent scrutiny — the place it is headed for is going to be very different from the place it imagined. The shortfall between the imagined and the real, multiplied by the violence of one’s intent, equals the evil one will do."
(George Saunders, The Braindead Megaphone, 2007)

"Every well-thought-out rebuttal to dogma, every scrap of intelligent logic, every absurdist reduction of some bullying stance is the antidote. Every request for the clarification of the vague, every poke at smug banality, every pen stroke in a document under revision is the antidote… We still have the ability to rise up… keep reminding ourselves that representations of the world are never the world itself."
(George Saunders)

E3.6.3_REF8_LIT I_Kay Nielsen_ Illustration from East of the Sun and West of the Moon

WE ARE CHARACTERS TRAPPED IN OUR OWN FIRST-PERSON STORIES, VIEWING OURSELVES AS THE "CENTER OF THE UNIVERSE."
"Over time, our stories harden into certainties that collide with each other every time we engage with another person, who is another story"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)


"I think, therefore I am wrong, after which I speak, and my wrongness falls on someone also thinking wrongly, and then there are two of us thinking wrongly, and, being human, we can’t bear to think without taking action, which, having been taken, makes things worse. […]

The entire drama of life on earth is: Skaz-Headed Person #1 [embodiment of the unreliable first-person narration known as skaz that permeates classic Russian literature] steps outside, where he encounters Skaz-Headed Person #2. Both, seeing themselves as the center of the universe, thinking highly of themselves, immediately slightly misunderstand everything. [...]

In a world full of people who seem to know everything, passionately, based on little (often slanted) information, where certainty is often mistaken for power, what a relief it is to be in the company of someone confident enough to stay unsure (that is, perpetually curious)."
(George Saunders, A Swim in a Pond in the Rain: In Which Four Russians Give a Master Class on Writing, Reading, and Life, 2021)

E3.6.4. Reading yourself as fiction to reclaim freedom. We have the power to be "Inventors" rather than just "Discoverers," rewriting the character with fluidity and insufflating discontinuity in our narrative.

E3.6.4_REF1_TH “HERE ARE [THE] TWO DECISIVE QUESTIONS:
”AM I SEPARATE FROM THE UNIVERSE? IF SO, THEN WHEN I OBSERVE, I OBSERVE AS IF THROUGH A KEYHOLE A UNIVERSE IN EVOLUTION.“
”AM I PART OF THE UNIVERSE? THEN, WITH EACH OF MY ACTIONS, I CHANGE BOTH MYSELF AND THE UNIVERSE."
Every time I think about this alternative, I am always surprised by the depth of the abyss that separates the two fundamentally different worlds that such a choice can create: either seeing myself as a citizen of a universe independent of me, whose norms, rules, and customs I may eventually discover; or seeing myself as a participant in an enterprise whose customs, rules, and norms we invent every day.
When I talk to people who have either decided to be discoverers or decided to be inventors, I am always struck by the fact that none of them are aware that they ever made this decision. Moreover, when challenged to justify their position, they construct a conceptual framework that is ultimately itself the result of a choice made on a question that is essentially undecidable. [...]
The important point here is freedom; freedom of choice; this is what José Ortega y Gasset is talking about:
Man has no nature, but a history. Man is not a thing, but a drama. His life is something he must choose, construct as he goes along, and it is in this choice and invention that he is human. Every human being is his own novelist, and although he has the choice of being an original writer or a plagiarist, he cannot escape the necessity of choosing. He is condemned to be free. [...]
Someone once asked me how the inhabitants of worlds as different as those I described earlier could live together: the inhabitants of the world they discover and the inhabitants of the world they invent. The answer is easy to find. The most likely scenario is that the discoverers will become astronomers, physicists, and engineers, while the inventors will become family therapists, psychologists, and biologists."
(Paul Watzlawick, Giorgio Nardone, Brief Therapy: A New Approach to Psychotherapy, 1997)

E3.6.4_REF2_PH WE ARE NOTHING BUT A SUCCESSION OF DISCONTINUOUS STATES IN RELATION TO THE CODE OF EVERYDAY SIGNS.
"Nietzsche again, through Klossowski (1): "To suppress the real world was also to suppress the world of appearances—and with them, once again, to suppress the notions of consciousness and unconsciousness, the outside and the inside. We are nothing but a succession of discontinuous states in relation to the code of everyday signs, and the fixity of language deceives us about this: as long as we depend on this code, we conceive of our continuity, even though we live only discontinuously; but these discontinuous states concern only our way of using or not using the fixity of language: to be conscious is to use it. But how can we ever know what we are as soon as we fall silent?
Note:
(1) P. Klossowski, Nietzsche et le Cercle vicieux, Paris, Mercure de France, 1969"
(Roland Barthes, Comment vivre ensemble, Lectures at the Collège de France, 1976-1977)

E3.6.4_REF3_PH HOW CAN WE EVER KNOW WHAT WE ARE WHEN WE ARE SILENT?
"Nietzsche again, through Klossowski (1): "To suppress the real world was also to suppress the world of appearances—and with them, the notions of consciousness and unconsciousness, outside and inside." We are nothing but a succession of discontinuous states in relation to the code of everyday signs, and the fixity of language deceives us about this. As long as we depend on this code, we conceive of our continuity, even though we live only discontinuously. But these discontinuous states concern only our way of using or not using the fixity of language. To be conscious is to use it." But how can we ever know what we are when we are silent?"
Note: 
(1) P. Klossowski, Nietzsche and the Vicious Cycle Paris, Mercure de France, 1969.
(Roland Barthes, “Comment vivre ensemble,” lectures at the Collège de France, 1976–1977)

E3.6.4_REF4_LIT A_Achille & Patrocle

YOU COULD PLAY OUT YOUR PART BEFORE YOUR OWN AWARENESS, AND BE TO THE END BOTH PERFORMER AND AUDIENCE!
“I think that down at the bottom of my being has been concealed from pretty early days a deep distrust and a shrewd suspicion of that solidity of the objective world that most people take for granted. I was always superstitious—at one time I even believed in Hell—but I am pretty sure that the more I became true to my subtler instincts the more I regarded the whole astronomical universe with a certain detachment, regarded it in fact as the mere material stage for playing whatever romantic, picturesque, or fantastical rôle a person’s life-illusion might arbitrarily select. It has always appealed to me — that legendary last word of Cesar Augustus: 

“Have I not played the Farce well? Put out the lights: ring down the curtain! Plaudite et vale! “ 

Deep, deep, deep must have sunken into my soul that grandiose acting in the presence of the gods and of Fate, of those classic Greeks and Romans! My mania for the sceptical Shakespeare, who like his own more sceptical master Montaigne, had a passion for these consummate actors, encouraged this predilection in me. Oh, how I revelled in every line of his Julius Cesar; and how startled I was when, in reading Dante, I found Brutus and Cassius thrust down to the bottom of Hell! 

At a very early age somebody read to me Church’s Stories  from Homer, and I found out that those more primeval and more elemental heroes were just as addicted to this vision of themselves as acting a spectacular part before gods and men, whether in exultation or desperation, as were the Greeks and Romans of the historical times. Thus I learned at a very early age what a consolation in life it is to enjoy things and to endure things as an actor; that is to say, not hugger-mugger, and in brute unconsciousness, but as though in default of any god or even of any fellow mortal, you could play out your part before your own awareness, and be to the end both performer and audience! “
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 121-122)

E3.6.4_REF5_LIT. A_Daniel Senise_Biógrafo XLVII_2018

"ONE OF THE THINGS THE STORY TEACHES US IS THIS: READ YOURSELF AS A FICTION AS WELL AS A FACT.

When I was growing up poor in a poor place with a pair of Pentecostal parents who were waiting for Jesus to return and roll up time and space like a scroll, I never thought my life was narrow or my chances bleak. I thought I was Heathcliff, Huck Finn, Hotspur, Aladdin, the Big Bad Wolf. The Fish with a Golden Ring.

And later, when I had left home at sixteen and was living in a Mini, I had my favourite books stashed in the boot and whenever I could be in the library, I was there. This wasn’t a fantasy world or escapism — though it was an escape; it was the hidden door in the blank wall. Open it.

I opened the book and went through.

The escape into another story reminds us that we too are another story. Not caught, not confined, not predestined, not only one gender or passion. Learning to read yourself as a fiction as well as a fact is liberating — it is the difference between energy and mass. Mass is the beloved object — the world we can touch and feel — but mass is also the dead weight in ourselves and others.

Shifting the dead weight takes energy but at its atomic core the dead weight is energy. Transforming mass into energy, energy into mass is what creative work is about. An idea becomes embodied. A tragedy is released."
(Jeanette Winterson, Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit, 1985)

E3.6.4_REF6_TH A_René Magritte_Faraway looks_1927 ; A_René Magritte_Everyday_1966 /René Magritte/

TO BE OURSELVES WE MUST HAVE OURSELVES — POSSESS, IF NEED BE RE-POSSESS, OUR LIFE-STORIES.
"In the twelfth chapter, titled “A Matter of Identity,” Dr. Sacks recounts the case of a patient with a memory disorder that rendered him unable to recognize not only others but himself — unable, that is, to retain the autobiographical facts which a person constellates into a selfhood. To compensate for this amnesiac anomaly, the man unconsciously invented countless phantasmagorical narratives about who he was and what he had done in his life, crowding the void of his identity with imagined selves and experiences he fully believed were real, were his own, far surpassing what any one person could compress into a single lifetime. [...]
But just as depression can be seen as melancholy in the complex clinical extreme and bipolar disorder as moodiness in the complex clinical extreme, every pathological malady of the mind is a complex clinical extreme of a core human tendency that inheres in each of our minds in tamer degrees. By magnifying basic tendencies to such extraordinary extremes, clinical cases offer a singular lens on how the ordinary mind works — and that, of course, is the great gift of Oliver Sacks, who wrests from his particular patient case studies uncommon insight into the universals of human nature.
“Such a patient,” Sacks writes of the inventive amnesiac man, “must literally make himself (and his world) up every moment.” And yet that is precisely what we are all doing in a certain sense, to a certain degree, as we continually make ourselves and our world up through the stories we tell ourselves and others.
Sacks examines the building blocks of that self-conception and how narrative becomes the pillar of our identity:

"We have, each of us, a life-story, an inner narrative — whose continuity, whose sense, is our lives. It might be said that each of us constructs and lives, a “narrative,” and that this narrative is us, our identities.
If we wish to know about a man, we ask “what is his story — his real, inmost story?” — for each of us is a biography, a story. Each of us is a singular narrative, which is constructed, continually, unconsciously, by, through, and in us — through our perceptions, our feelings, our thoughts, our actions; and, not least, our discourse, our spoken narrations. Biologically, physiologically, we are not so different from each other; historically, as narratives — we are each of us unique. [....]
To be ourselves we must have ourselves — possess, if need be re-possess, our life-stories. We must “recollect” ourselves, recollect the inner drama, the narrative, of ourselves. A man needs such a narrative, a continuous inner narrative, to maintain his identity, his self."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings, on Oliver Sacks' The man who mistook his wife for a hat, 1985)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2018/01/15/oliver-sacks-identity-self-narrative/

E3.6.4_REF7_LIT “I TAKE THE WORLD AS I AM.”
(Louis Cutner)

E3.6.4_REF8_SCI A_Rui Chafes_The weight of paradise_2004_(1) ; A_Rui Chafes_The weight of paradise_2004_(2) /Rui Chafes/

THE HUMAN SPECIES CONTEMPLATING ITSELF.
"As we hurtle toward a cold and barren cosmos, we must accept that there is no grand design. Particles are not endowed with purpose. There is no final answer hovering in the depths of space awaiting discovery. Instead, certain special collections of particles can think and feel and reflect, and within these subjective worlds they can create purpose. And so, in our quest to fathom the human condition, the only direction to look is inward. That is the noble direction where to look. It is a direction that forgoes ready-made answers and turns to the highly personal journey of constructing our own meaning. It is a direction that leads to the very heart of creative expression and the source of our most resonant narratives. Science is a powerful, exquisite tool for grasping an external reality. But within that rubric, within that understanding, everything else is the human species contemplating itself, grasping what it needs to carry on, and telling a story that reverberates into the darkness, a story carved of sound and etched into silence, a story that, at its best, stirs the soul."
(Brian Greene, Until the End of Time: Mind, Matter, and Our Search for Meaning in an Evolving Universe)

E3.6.4_REF9_CUR In Ang Lee's film Life of Pi (2012), the tiger on the boat does not exist: it is Pi murdering the cook (the hyena), Pi despairing after seeing the cook kill his mother (the orangutan) and the zebra.
 
The tiger was “sleeping” under the boat's tarpaulin and only woke up after the unbearable murder of Pi's mother.
At first, he is terrified of the “tiger,” but little by little he “tames” it.
Once back in the human world, the “tiger” that is Pi returns to hide in the forest without even looking back: Pi must forget what happened on the boat in order to continue living sanely.
Pi constructed the story after recounting it to the investigators who questioned him upon his return to the coast.

Watch the key scene on YouTube.
We understand that the animals were projections of the humans on the boat.: https://youtu.be/7_jJ1rECP7E

Pi “releases” the art of the tigre in himself so that he can live among humans again: https://youtu.be/NKSQtevzuqo


E3.6.4_REF10_PH A_Andy Denzler, Studies for the portrait of Ella_2021

HOW CAN WE KNOW WHAT WE ARE AS SOON AS WE ARE SILENT?
"We are only a succession of discontinuous states in relation to the code of daily signs, on which language's fixity deceives us. As long as we depend on this code, we conceive of our continuity, although we live only discontinuously. But these discontinuous states concern only our way of using—or not using—the fixity of language: to be conscious is to use it. But how can we know what we are as soon as we are silent?"
(Pierre Klossowski, Nietzsche and the Vicious Circle, 1969)

E3.6.4_REF11_PO A BIOGRAPHY: IS THIS THEN WHAT THE AUTHOR CALLS A MAN'S LIFE?
"When I read the book, the biography famous, 
And is this then (said I) what the author calls a man's life? 
And so will some one when I am dead and gone write my life? 
(As if any man really knew aught of my life,
 Why even I myself I often think know little or nothing of my real life, 
Only a few hints, a few diffused faint clews and indirections 
I seek for my own use to trace out here.)"
(Walt Whitman, Leaves of grass, 1855)

E3.6.4_REF12_LIT I_Paloma Valdivia_Illustration from Pablo Neruda’s Book of Questions_(2)

BY ADVOCATING FOR "NOT DECIDING" SO THAT "FURTHER INFORMATION TO KEEP COMING IN," SAUNDERS CHAMPIONS A SELF-NARRATIVE THAT IS FLUID AND REVISING, RATHER THAN DOGMATIC.
"In a world full of people who seem to know everything, passionately, based on little (often slanted) information, where certainty is often mistaken for power, what a relief it is to be in the company of someone confident enough to stay unsure (that is, perpetually curious). [...]

It’s hard to be alive. The anxiety of living makes us want to judge, be sure, have a stance, definitively decide. Having a fixed, rigid system of belief can be a great relief. […]

As long as we don’t decide, we allow further information to keep coming in. Reading a story like “Gooseberries” [from Chekhov] might be seen as a way of practicing this. It reminds us that any question in the form “Is X right or wrong?” could benefit from another round of clarifying questions. Question: “Is X good or bad?” Story: “For whom? On what day, under what conditions? Might there be some unintended consequences associated with X? Some good hidden in the bad that is X? Some bad hidden in the good that is X? Tell me more.”"
(George Saunders, A Swim in a Pond in the Rain: In Which Four Russians Give a Master Class on Writing, Reading, and Life, 2021)

E3.6.4_REF12.1_LIT WE MUST "DENY OURSELVES THE COMFORT OF ALWAYS BEING THE SAME PERSON."

"Openness to more — to truth beyond story, to beauty beyond certainty — is precisely what teaches us how to love the world more."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)


"This feeling of fondness for the world takes the form, in his [Chekhov's] stories, of a constant state of reexamination. (“Am I sure? Is it really so? Is my preexisting opinion causing me to omit anything?”) He has a gift for reconsideration. Reconsideration is hard; it takes courage. We have to deny ourselves the comfort of always being the same person, one who arrived at an answer some time ago and has never had any reason to doubt it. In other words, we have to stay open (easy to say, in that confident, New Age way, but so hard to actually do, in the face of actual, grinding, terrifying life). As we watch Chekhov continually, ritually doubt all conclusions, we’re comforted. It’s all right to reconsider. It’s noble — holy, even. It can be done. We can do it. We know this because of the example he leaves in his stories, which are, we might say, splendid, brief reconsideration machines."
(George Saunders, A Swim in a Pond in the Rain: In Which Four Russians Give a Master Class on Writing, Reading, and Life, 2021)

E3.7. The Self as Habit: "Your Identity is Literally Your 'Repeated Beingness'". Becoming self-aware means actively choosing new habits to build a new self, intentionally becoming a stranger to the person we used to be.

E3.7.1. The Sedimentation of Circumstance — Deconstructing the Myth of a Fixed Essence. What we call "Identity" is actually just an accumulation of past moments, accidents, and repetitions.

E3.7.1_REF1_PH P_Blur

"TWO MAIN REASONS CAN BE CITED FOR THE APPALLING NATURE OF THE IDEA OF CHANCE, OR THE MATERIALISM OF CHANCE: 1) The idea of chance dissolves the idea of nature and calls into question the notion of being; 2) It precisely matches the definition of terror proposed by psychoanalysis following Freud: the loss of familiarity or, more accurately, the discovery that the familiar is, unexpectedly, an unknown realm par excellence, the high place of strangeness. […]
The condition required for the recognition of such natures is that the power of chance—or of habit, custom, learning, in short, of everything that can be considered an adjacent “circumstance”—stops at the boundaries of “something” that exists prior to the possibility of such interventions. Thus, human, plant, and mineral natures require, in order to exist, that something transcending all circumstances be contained within them. However, the thinker of chance asserts that “what exists” is exclusively made up of circumstances; that the relatively stable entities that bear, for example, the names of man, stone, or plant, represent certain sedimentations of circumstances that, by chance, by a happy (or unhappy) coincidence, have led to the organization of hazardous and shifting generalities (as random and shifting as each of the singularities of which they are composed); sedimentations that only the brevity—in every sense of the word—of a human perspective allows us to envisage as generalities, entities, natures. […]"
(Clément Rosset, Logic of the worse, 1971)

E3.7.1_REF2_PH  V_Jean Dupuy_Self-portrait_1974_(1) ; V_Jean Dupuy_Self-portrait_1974_(2) ; V_Jean Dupuy_Self-portrait_1974_(3) ; V_Jean Dupuy_Self-portrait_1974_(4) /Jean Dupuy/

"HABIT IS THE CONSTITUTIVE ROOT OF THE SUBJECT."
“First, in relation to time: The mind, as conceived in the manner of its perceived appearances, is essentially a succession of time. Speaking of the subject now means speaking of duration, custom, habit, and expectation. Expectation is habit; habit is expectation. These two aspects, the push of the past and the momentum toward the future, are the two fundamental dynamics at the heart of Hume's philosophy. There is no need to strain the texts to find most of the characteristics of Bergsonian memory in habit-expectation. Habit is the constitutive root of the subject. What the subject is at its root is the synthesis of time: the present and past in relation to the future. [...]

Expectation, the future, is the synthesis of time that the subject creates in the mind.

Habituation not only familiarizes us with things we have long enjoyed, but also engenders a preference for them over more estimable, yet unfamiliar, objects.

The same is true of belief. We know that belief is merely a vivid idea linked by a causal relationship to a present impression. Belief is a feeling—a particular way of feeling an idea. It is the idea "felt rather than conceived," the vivid idea. Therefore, to analyze this feeling, we must examine the causal relationship, as this is what gives the idea its vividness. In this analysis, the feeling reveals its source as the product of the synthesis of time. [...]

Habit is the great guide of human life. Without habit, we would never learn to adapt means to ends or use our natural abilities to achieve results. It would mean the end of action and almost all speculation.

In short, synthesis consists of establishing the past as the rule for the future. In both belief and property, we encounter the same transformation. Time was the structure of the mind, but now, the subject presents itself as the synthesis of time. To understand this transformation's meaning, note that the mind included memory in Hume's sense of the word. In the collection of perceptions, we distinguished the impressions of the senses, the ideas of memory, and the ideas of the imagination according to degrees of vividness. Memory is the reappearance of an impression in the form of a vivid idea. However, it did not operate any synthesis of time itself. It did not transcend structure; its essential role was to reproduce the given structures. Habit, on the other hand, presents itself as a synthesis and returns to the subject. Memory was the old present; it was not the past. The past is not simply what has been, but what determines, acts, drives, and weighs in a certain way. In this sense, habit is to memory as the subject is to the mind. Even more so, habit easily dispenses with the mind's dimension of memory; habit does not need memory. It usually does without it in one way or another. Sometimes, there is no evocation of memories; sometimes, there is no particular memory to evoke. In short, the past is not simply what has been; it is constituted by a synthesis that gives the subject its true origin and source."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.7.1_REF2.1_PH A_Liliana Porter_1973_(1) ; A_Liliana Porter_1973_(2) ; A_Liliana Porter_1973_(3) /Liliana Porter/

"The past and the present are constituted in time, under the influence of certain principles, and the synthesis of time is itself only this constitution, this organization, this double affection. The problem is thus: how, in time, do a present and a past constitute themselves? From this point of view, the analysis of the causal relation in its essential dualism makes sense. On the one hand, Hume presents us with experience as a principle that manifests a multiplicity, a repetition of similar cases; literally, this principle affects the time of the past. On the other hand, he sees in habits another principle that determines us to focus now from one object to the one that accompanied it, that is to say, that organizes time as a perpetual present to which we must and can adapt ourselves. And if we refer to the distinctions that Hume makes when he analyzes « the inference from impression to idea, » we can give the following definitions: understanding is the mind itself, but which, under the influence of the principle of experience, reflects time as a past subject to its observation; and imagination, under the influence of the principle of habits, is still the mind, but which reflects time as a determinate future filled by its expectations. Belief is the relationship between these two constituted dimensions."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.7.1_REF3_PH  GASTON BACHELARD ARGUES THAT THE CONTINUITY OF THE SELF ACROSS THE "VOID" OF TIME IS MAINTAINED ONLY BY THE "DENSITY" OF HABIT.
"First, the individual corresponds to a simultaneity of instantaneous actions insofar as he is complex. He finds himself only in proportion to the extent to which these simultaneous actions begin again. We can express this by saying that an individual, in the sum of his qualities and becoming, corresponds to a harmony of temporal rhythms. Indeed, rhythm is the best way to understand the continuity of the discontinuous, which we must establish to connect the peaks of being and outline its unity. Rhythm bridges silence just as being bridges the temporal void separating moments. Being continues through habit, just as time lasts through the regular density of moments without duration. At least, this is how we interpret Roupen's thesis: 'The individual is the expression, not of a constant cause, but of a juxtaposition of incessant memories fixed by matter, whose ligature is itself only a habit overlapping all others.'" Being is nothing more than a strange place of memories, and one could say that its perceived permanence is merely an expression of its habitual nature." 

Ultimately, the coherence of being is not made up of matter's inherent qualities and becoming; it is entirely harmonic and ethereal. It is fragile and free, like a symphony. A particular habit is a sustained rhythm in which actions are repeated fairly evenly, balancing their novelty value without ever losing their character as something new. The dilution of the new can be such that the habit sometimes passes for unconscious. It seems that the intense consciousness of the first attempt has been lost by being divided among all the repetitions. [...]

At whatever level we grasp the individual—in matter, life, or thought—he is a fairly variable sum of unrecorded habits. Since the habits that characterize a being do not simultaneously take advantage of all the moments that could actualize them, a being's unity always seems affected by contingency. Fundamentally, the individual is a sum of accidents, and this sum is also accidental. At the same time, a being's identity is never fully realized. It suffers from a lack of sufficient attention to the richness of habits. Global identity is made up of more or less exact repetitions and more or less detailed reflections. Undoubtedly, the individual strives to copy today from yesterday, aided by the dynamics of rhythms. However, these rhythms are not all at the same point in their evolution. Thus, even the most solid spiritual permanence of a desired identity affirmed in character degrades into resemblance. Life carries our image from mirror to mirror, making us reflections of reflections. Our courage is made up of the memory of our decisions. However firm we may be, we never remain whole because we have never been aware of our entire being. [...]"
(Gaston Bachelard, The Intuition of the Moment, 1931)

E3.7.2. The Architecture of Becoming — Active Repetition (the neuroscience of prediction), the Courage to Be a Stranger and the practical method of casting "votes" for a new identity.

E3.7.2_REF1_LIT A_Andy Denzler_Study for the portrait of Ella_2021_(1) ; A_Andy Denzler_Study for the portrait of Ella_2021_(2) /Andy Denzler/

"No two human beings ever experience two sensations, experiences, feelings, or thoughts identically. Everything changes, everything is always different. All of these variables merging, interacting, destroying each other, building new forms, ideas, “realities,” mean that the human experience is one of constant change and, as we label it, “growth” [and yet] most living human beings build their lives around the belief that these differences, changes, don’t exist. They choose to ignore these things and attempt to program or control their own existence. They make schedules, long-term commitments, set up a system of time and become controlled by their system of controls. [...] 

People don’t want to know that they change.
Unless they feel it is an improvement, and then they are all for “change,” and will go to great lengths to “make changes” or contrive situations or force a change that is unnatural… Some attitudes I see all around me are:
Change is acceptable as long as it is controllable.
Change can be predicted.
Changes can be contrived and/or altered and/or planned. [...]

Most simply, people know to some extent that they feel different at different times or look different to themselves different days, but few people really try to experience this or question it or really investigate its reasons or its implications. [...]

To be a victim of your own knowledge is not understanding what your knowledge is and what its result is.
To be a victim of change is to ignore its existence.
To be a victim of “living by what you think” is to ignore the possibilities of “another way to live” or the possibility of “being wrong about the way it is” or ignoring the possibility of “not knowing what you think.”
Thinking you know the answer is as dangerous as not thinking about the possibility of no answers."
(Keith Haring, Keith Haring Journals)

E3.7.2_REF2_LIT JAMES CLEAR ARGUES THAT YOUR IDENTITY IS NOT FIXED BUT IS THE EMBODIMENT OF YOUR HABITS, AS EACH REPEATED ACTION SERVES AS A "VOTE" PROVIDING EVIDENCE FOR WHO YOU BELIEVE YOU ARE, MEANING THAT THE PROCESS OF BECOMING A BETTER VERSION OF YOURSELF IS THE PROCESS OF BUILDING NEW HABITS.
“Your identity emerges out of your habits. You are not born with preset beliefs.
Every belief, including those about yourself, is learned and conditioned through
experience.

More precisely, your habits are how you embody your identity. When you
make your bed each day, you embody the identity of an organized person. When
you write each day, you embody the identity of a creative person. When you
train each day, you embody the identity of an athletic person.
The more you repeat a behavior, the more you reinforce the identity
associated with that behavior. In fact, the word identity was originally derived
from the Latin words essentitas, which means being, and identidem, which
means repeatedly. Your identity is literally your “repeated beingness.”
Whatever your identity is right now, you only believe it because you have
proof of it. If you go to church every Sunday for twenty years, you have
evidence that you are religious. If you study biology for one hour every night,
you have evidence that you are studious. If you go to the gym even when it’s
snowing, you have evidence that you are committed to fitness. The more
evidence you have for a belief, the more strongly you will believe it.
For most of my early life, I didn’t consider myself a writer. If you were to ask
any of my high school teachers or college professors, they would tell you I was
an average writer at best: certainly not a standout. When I began my writing
career, I published a new article every Monday and Thursday for the first few
years. As the evidence grew, so did my identity as a writer. I didn’t start out as a
writer. I became one through my habits.
Of course, your habits are not the only actions that influence your identity, but
by virtue of their frequency they are usually the most important ones. Each
experience in life modifies your self-image, but it’s unlikely you would consider
yourself a soccer player because you kicked a ball once or an artist because you
scribbled a picture. As you repeat these actions, however, the evidence
accumulates and your self-image begins to change. The effect of one-off
experiences tends to fade away while the effect of habits gets reinforced with
time, which means your habits contribute most of the evidence that shapes your
identity. In this way, the process of building habits is actually the process of
becoming yourself. […]

When working for you, identity change can be a powerful force for selfimprovement.
When working against you, though, identity change can be a curse. Once you
have adopted an identity, it can be easy to let your allegiance to it impact your
ability to change. Many people walk through life in a cognitive slumber, blindly
following the norms attached to their identity.

“I’m terrible with directions.”
“I’m not a morning person.”
“I’m bad at remembering people’s names.”
“I’m always late.”
“I’m not good with technology.”
“I’m horrible at math.”
. . . and a thousand other variations.
When you have repeated a story to yourself for years, it is easy to slide into
these mental grooves and accept them as a fact. In time, you begin to resist
certain actions because “that’s not who I am.” There is internal pressure to
maintain your self-image and behave in a way that is consistent with your
beliefs. You find whatever way you can to avoid contradicting yourself.
The more deeply a thought or action is tied to your identity, the more difficult
it is to change it. It can feel comfortable to believe what your culture believes
(group identity) or to do what upholds your self-image (personal identity), even
if it’s wrong. The biggest barrier to positive change at any level—individual,
team, society—is identity conflict. Good habits can make rational sense, but if
they conflict with your identity, you will fail to put them into action.
On any given day, you may struggle with your habits because you’re too busy
or too tired or too overwhelmed or hundreds of other reasons. Over the long run,
however, the real reason you fail to stick with habits is that your self-image gets
in the way. This is why you can’t get too attached to one version of your
identity. Progress requires unlearning. Becoming the best version of yourself
requires you to continuously edit your beliefs, and to upgrade and expand your
identity. […]

Each habit not only gets results but also teaches you something far more
important: to trust yourself. You start to believe you can actually accomplish
these things. When the votes mount up and the evidence begins to change, the
story you tell yourself begins to change as well.
Of course, it works the opposite way, too. Every time you choose to perform a
bad habit, it’s a vote for that identity. The good news is that you don’t need to be
perfect. In any election, there are going to be votes for both sides. You don’t
need a unanimous vote to win an election; you just need a majority. It doesn’t
matter if you cast a few votes for a bad behavior or an unproductive habit. Your
goal is simply to win the majority of the time.
New identities require new evidence. If you keep casting the same votes
you’ve always cast, you’re going to get the same results you’ve always had. If
nothing changes, nothing is going to change.
It is a simple two-step process:

1. Decide the type of person you want to be.
2. Prove it to yourself with small wins.”
(James Clear, Atomic habits, 2018)

E3.7.2_REF3_SCI BARRETT USES NEUROSCIENCE TO VALIDATE THE BUDDHIST VIEW OF THE SELF AS A CONSTRUCTED FICTION, showing how deconstructing this concept reduces suffering through emotional recategorization and meditation.
“Buddhism considers the self to be a fiction and the primary cause of human suffering. Whenever you crave material things like expensive cars and clothes, or desire compliments to enhance your reputation, or seek posi-tions of status and power to benefit your life, Buddhism says you are treat-ing your fictional self as real (reifying the self). These material concerns may bring immediate gratification and pleasure but they also entrap you, like golden handcuffs, and cause persistent suffering, which we would call pro-longed unpleasant affect. To a Buddhist, a self is worse than a passing physical illness. It is an enduring affliction.
My scientific definition of the self is inspired by the workings of the brain yet is sympathetic to the Buddhist view. The self is part of social reality. It’s not exactly a fiction, but neither is it objectively real in nature like a neutron. It depends on other people. In scientific terms, your predictions in the moment, and your actions that derive from them, depend to some extent on the way that others treat you. You can’t be a self by yourself. We can un-derstand why Tom Hanks’s character in the movie Cast Away, who was ma-rooned alone on a desert island for four years, needed to create a companion named Wilson out of a volleyball.
Certain behaviors and preferences are consistent with your self and some are not. There are foods you enjoy and others you’d prefer not to eat. You might call yourself a “dog person” or a “cat person.” These behaviors and preferences vary quite a bit: your favorite food might be French fries, but not at every meal. The most enthusiastic dog lovers know a couple of dogs that they can’t stand and are secretly fond of a few cats. Overall, your self is like a collection of dos and don’ts that summarizes your likes, dislikes, and habits in the moment.
We’ve seen something like this before. These dos and don’ts are like the features of a concept. So in my view, the self is a plain, ordinary concept just like “Tree,” “Things That Protect You from Stinging Insects,” and “Fear.” I am quite sure you don’t go around thinking of yourself as a concept, but just go with me for a bit on this.
If the self is a concept, then you construct instances of your self by simulation. Each instance fits your goals in the moment. Sometimes you cat-egorize yourself by your career. Sometimes you’re a parent, or a child, or a lover. Sometimes you’re just a body. Social psychologists say that we have multiple selves, but you can think of this repertoire as instances of a single, goal-based concept called “The Self ” in which the goal shifts based on context.
How does your brain keep track of all the varied instances of your “Self ” as an infant, a young child, an adolescent, a middle-aged adult, and an older adult? Because one part of you has remained constant: you’ve always had a body. Every concept you have ever learned includes the state of your body (as interoceptive predictions) at the time of learning. Some concepts involve a lot of interoception, such as “Sadness,” and others have less, such as “Plastic Wrap,” but they’re always in relation to the same body. So every categorization you construct  —  about objects in the world, other people, purely mental concepts like “Justice,” and so on  —  contains a little bit of you. This is the rudimentary mental basis of your sense of self.
The fiction of the self, paralleling the Buddhist idea, is that you have some enduring essence that makes you who you are. You do not. I speculate that your self is constructed anew in every moment by the same predictive, core systems that construct emotions, including our familiar pair of networks (interoceptive and control), among others, as they categorize the continuous stream of sensation from your body and the world. As a matter of fact, a portion of the interoceptive network, called the default mode net-work, has been called the “self system.” It consistently increases in activity during self-reflection. If you have atrophy in your default mode network, as happens in Alzheimer’s disease, you eventually lose your sense of self.
Deconstructing the self offers a new inspiration for how to become the master of your emotions. By tweaking your conceptual system and changing your predictions, you not only change your future experiences; you can actually change your “Self.” […]
When you are suffering from some ill or insult that has befallen you, ask yourself: Are you really in jeopardy here? Or is this so-called injury merely threatening the social reality of your self ? The answer will help you recategorize your pounding heartbeat, the knot in the pit of your stomach, and your sweaty brow as purely physical sensations, leaving your worry, anger, and dejection to dissolve like an antacid tablet in water.
I’m not saying this kind of recategorization is easy, but with practice it’s possible, and it’s also healthful. When you categorize something as “Not About Me,” it exits your affective niche and has less impact on your body budget. Similarly, when you are successful and feel proud, honored, or gratified, take a step back and remember that these pleasant emotions are en-tirely the result of social reality, reinforcing your fictional self. Celebrate your achievements but don’t let them become golden handcuffs. A little composure goes a long way.
If you are interested in taking this strategy further, try meditation. Mind-fulness meditation, just one type of many, teaches you to stay alert and pres-ent in the moment but to observe sensations as they come and go, non-judgmentally.* This state (which requires tremendous practice) reminds me of the quiet, alert state of newborn babies when they observe the world, their brains comfortably awash in prediction error, with no anxiety in sight. They experience sensations and release them. Meditation achieves some-thing similar. This state may take years of practice to achieve, so the next best thing is to recategorize your thoughts, feelings, and perceptions as physical sensations, which are easier to let go of. You can use meditation, at least at first, to prioritize categorizations that focus on the physical, and deprioritize those that add more psychological meaning about you or your place in the world.
Meditation has a potent effect on brain structure and function, though scientists have not sorted out the exact details yet. Key regions in the intero-ceptive and control networks are larger for meditators, and connections be-tween these regions are stronger. This matches what we might expect, since the interoceptive network is critical to constructing mental concepts and representing physical sensations from the body, and the control network is critical to regulating categorization. […]
Sometimes deconstructing the self is too challenging. You can achieve some of the same benefits more simply by cultivating and experiencing awe, the feeling of being in the presence of something vastly greater than yourself. It helps you get some distance from your self.

*From a Buddhist perspective, we might say that deconstructing the self helps to “suspend categorization.” From a neuroscience perspective, however, the brain never stops predicting so you can’t turn off concepts.”

(Lisa Feldman Barrett, How Emotions Are Made - The Secret Life of the Brain, 2017)

E3.8. The Social Self: A Stranger to Ourselves, a Character for Others. Our "I" is not even our own story—it is a social fiction.

E3.8.1. The "I" is a Ghost: Deconstructing the Myth of the Interior. What we call "I" is a phantom, a void, or a collection of borrowed qualities, rather than a solid, autonomous entity.

E3.8.1_REF1_PO P_Sylvia Plath

"What do I know of sorrow? No one I love has ever died or been tortured. I have never wanted for food to eat, or a place to sleep. I have been gifted with five senses and an attractive exterior. So I can philosophize from my snug little cushioned seat. So I am going to one of the most outstanding colleges in America; I am living with two thousand of the most outstanding girls in the United States. What have I to complain about? Nothing much. The main way I can add to my self-respect is by saying that I’m on scholarship, and if I hadn’t exercised my free will and studied through high school I never would be here. But when you come right down to it, how much of that was free will? How much was the capacity to think that I got from my parents, the home urge to study and do well academically, the necessity to find an alternative for the social world of boys and girls to which I was forbidden acceptance? And does not my desire to write come from a tendency toward introversion begun when I was small, brought up as I was in the fairy-tale world of Mary Poppins and Winnie-the-Pooh? Did not that set me apart from most of my school mates? — the fact that I got all A’s and was “different” from the rough-and-tumble Conways — how I am not quite sure, but “different” as the animal with the touch of human hands about him when he returns to the herd. All this may be a subtle way of egoistically separating myself from the common herd, but take it for what it’s worth. [...]

As for free will, there is such a narrow crack of it for man to move in, crushed as he is from birth by environment, heredity, time and event and local convention. If I had been born of Italian parents in one of the caves in the hills I would be a prostitute at the age of 12 or so because I had to live (why?) and that was the only way open. If I was born into a wealthy New York family with pseudo-cultural leanings, I would have had my coming-out party along with the rest of them, and be equipped with fur coats, social contacts, and a blasé pout. How do I know? I don’t; I can only guess. I wouldn’t be I. But I am I now; and so many other millions are so irretrievably their own special variety of “I” that I can hardly bear to think of it. I: how firm a letter; how reassuring the three strokes: one vertical, proud and assertive, and then the two short horizontal lines in quick, smug succession. The pen scratches on the paper … I … I … I … I … I … I."
(Sylvia Plath, The Unabridged Journals of Sylvia Plath, 1982)

E3.8.1_REF2_PH ACCEPTING ONE'S UNIQUE EXISTENCE IMPLIES THE HUMILIATING CONCESSION THAT ONE IS "ONLY THAT" AND NOTHING MORE.
“The taste for complication expresses, first and foremost, a need for duplication, necessary for the evasive assumption of a reality whose raw uniqueness is instinctively sensed as indigestible. Understood in this way, this rejection of simplicity allows us to understand why the “precious” make a fuss: less to shine in the world than to attenuate the brilliance of reality, whose radiance hurts them with its intolerable uniqueness. The thing is only tolerable when mediated, duplicated: there is nothing in this world that can be taken at face value. This is what Magdelon expresses very clearly in Molière when she declares to her father that she cannot “come straight to the point of marital union” and that she has “pain in her heart at the mere sight of it” (Les Précieuses ridicules, se. IV). We know the meaning, confirmed by etymology, of the French expression “de but en blanc”: to go straight for the target, to aim directly at the one without the aid of the double. Complication here is only a stopgap, a protective attitude against the inevitability of the one, to which fuss, whether precious or metaphysical in nature, and assuming that these two natures differ from each other, will never bring anything but a temporary, or at least illusory, obstacle. Temporary if it is only a passing fuss; illusory in any case, even if it is a stubborn and definitive fuss: because the rejection of the unique will never be accompanied by the grasping of a double, so that the search for the double to which the unique has been sacrificed is doomed to failure anyway, since it is the search for “nothingness,” which we foolishly imagine to be the “other” of reality. This fuss is thus related to a very deep anxiety, which can be summarily described as the worry that by accepting to be what we are, we are at the same time conceding that we are only that. Uniqueness implies both triumph and humiliation: triumph in being the only one in the world, humiliation in being only that one self, that is to say, almost nothing, and soon nothing at all. Preciousness would like triumph without humiliation, and in this it reflects not only a taste for complication, but more profoundly a distaste for oneself as unique."
(Clément Rosset, reality and its double, 1976)

E3.8.1_REF3_PH I_The Possibility of an island

NIETZSCHE ARGUES THAT PEOPLE DO NOT SERVE THEIR REAL EGO, BUT A "PHANTOM OF THIS EGO, WHICH HAS GROWN UP IN THE HEADS OF THEIR FRIENDS."
"Pseudo-egotism.— The great majority—whatever they may think and say about their “ selfishness ”—as long as they live, do nothing for their ego, but only for the phantom of this ego, which has grown up in the heads of their friends and been transmitted to them; consequently they all live in a mist of impersonal, half-personal opinions, and of arbitrary, so to speak poetic valuations, the one for ever in the head of somebody else, and this one again in other heads: an odd world of phantasms, which knows how to give itself a matter-of-fact appearance ! This mist of opinions and habits grows and lives on, almost independently from the people which it envelopes— its outcome is the extensive effect of the general judgments on “ man ” ; all these people, unknown to themselves, believe in the bloodless abstract idea “ man,” that is, in a fiction; and every change which, through the judgments of some powerful men (such as princes and philosophers) occurs in this abstract idea, has an extraordinary and irrational effect on the great majority, for the sole reason that not a single individual in this multitude is able to oppose a real ego, accessible to and sounded by himself, to the general pale fiction, and thereby to destroy it."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, The dawn of day, Aphorism 105, 1881)

E3.8.1_REF4_PH  THE "SUPREMACY OF THE SOCIAL SELF OVER THE PRIVATE SELF."
“The supremacy of the social self over the private self is evident in the fact that, since Saint Augustine, all philosophers have attributed the continuity of the person to the faculty of memory. Without memory, the unity of the self would disperse and disintegrate into isolated sensations, independent of one another. However, the social self is interested in the person's actions and words because psychological follow-up does not lend itself to detailed recollection. It follows that if the self can only recommend itself on the basis of its memory, then it can only be the memory of a social being. Consequently, there is no self other than the social self.
Perhaps we can now better understand the profound meaning of Pascal's remark: "Let us therefore no longer mock those who seek honor for their positions and offices, for we love no one except for borrowed qualities." Pensées, Fragment 323, Pascal." It is not only a matter of stating the deplorable but necessary necessity of honoring the great, their positions, and their offices. It is also a matter of stating the serious philosophical truth that apart from the signs and actions that emanate from me and make me who I am, nothing belongs to me."
(Clément Rosset, Far from Me, Study on Identity)

E3.8.1_REF4.1_PH "What is the Ego?

Suppose a man puts himself at a window to see those who pass by. If I
pass by, can I say that he placed himself there to see me? No; for he
does not think of me in particular. But does he who loves someone on
account of beauty really love that person? No; for the small-pox, which
will kill beauty without killing the person, will cause him to love her
no more.

And if one loves me for my judgment, memory, he does not love _me_, for
I can lose these qualities without losing myself. Where, then, is this
Ego, if it be neither in the body nor in the soul? And how love the body
or the soul, except for these qualities which do not constitute _me_,
since they are perishable? For it is impossible and would be unjust to
love the soul of a person in the abstract, and whatever qualities might
be therein. We never, then, love a person, but only qualities.

Let us, then, jeer no more at those who are honoured on account of rank
and office; for we love a person only on account of borrowed qualities."
(Pascal, Pensées, Fragment 323-688)

E3.8.1_REF5_PH  A_Jon Rafman_New Age Demanded_2013 /Jon Rafman/ ; A_Darcy Dias_[Magazine covers] /Darcy Dias/

“THERE IS NO OTHER IDENTITY OTHER THAN SOCIAL IDENTITY, THERE IS NO 'DEEP SELF'. You never know anyone because there is nobody to know. The theme developed in 'Loin de moi' was already present in Montaigne (« Our fact and our self are only pieces added  on »), Pascal and David Hume.
We do have distinctive signs, particular signs, qualities but that does not imply that they are organized around an ego. Pascal wrote « it's not for me, it's for my qualities that I am liked ».
On the other hand, isn't consciousness pure becoming? The quest for the ego is a ghost hunt - a hunt in the void, a haunting of the truth (in the sense of being the haunting of a thing - its ghost), condemned to an infinite fall in the abyss. At the end of the quest for identity there is no absolute, the regression is infinite - all identity is constructed or posited in a Platonic metaphysical tradition. « The less I know myself, the better I feel »: the inability to make sense of my ego is not a burden."
(Clément Rosset in the program 'À voice nue', broadcast on France Culture on 02/22/2006)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/a-voix-nue/clement-rosset-le-reel-et-la-joie-hommage-35-3eme-episode

E3.8.1_REF6_PH  “AUTHENTICITY
The truth about oneself, or being what one appears to be (an 'authentic document'), or the truth about oneself to oneself (authentic behavior). In the latter sense, it is the opposite of bad faith. Is it a synonym for good faith? Rather, it is its name. The two concepts do not entirely overlap. To be sincere is to love the truth more than oneself. For many of our contemporaries, to be authentic is to love the truth of who one is or believes oneself to be. "Be yourself," they say across the Atlantic. Psychology has replaced morality, and personal development has replaced religion. Am I cowardly, selfish, or brutal? Undoubtedly, but at least give me credit for being authentically so! Authenticity is a comfortable virtue, which is why we doubt that it is one. It is narcissistic good faith, or good-faith narcissism. However, good faith does not excuse everything."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary (2001)

E2.2.A.1.2.a.vii.wE3.8.1. "[Presence]
Presences [are] the return of the unchartable soul… They are a mode of attending, being present to [one’s] experiences, without dominating or controlling them. […]

Understanding other conceptions of persons puts one on the way of being them; but understanding presences — if indeed there is understanding of them to be had — does not put one any closer to being one. It cannot be achieved by imitation, willing, practice, or a good education. It is a mode of identity invented precisely to go beyond of achievement and willfulness."
(Amélie Rorty, The Identities of Persons, 1976)

E3.8.2. Manufactured by the Other: The "I" as a Social Invention. We are "cemented" into a whole by the gaze of others and political necessity.

E3.8.2_REF1_LIT  "Paradoxically, in our golden age of identity politics and trigger-ready outrage, this repression of our inner wildness and fracturing of our wholeness has taken on an inverted form, inclining toward a parody of itself. Where Walt Whitman once invited us to celebrate the glorious multitudes we each contain and to welcome the wonder that comes from discovering one another’s multitudes afresh, we now cling to our identity-fragments, using them as badges and badgering artillery in confronting the templated identity-fragments of others. (For instance, some of mine: woman, reader, immigrant, writer, queer, survivor of Communism.) Because no composite of fragments can contain, much less represent, all possible fragments, we end up drifting further and further from one another’s wholeness, abrading all sense of shared aspiration toward unbiased understanding. The censors of yore have been replaced by the “sensitivity readers” of today, fraying the fabric of freedom — of speech, even of thought — from opposite ends, but fraying it nonetheless. The safety of conformity to an old-guard mainstream has been supplanted by the safety of conformity to a new-order minority predicated on some fragment of identity, so that those within each new group (and sub-group, and sub-sub-group) are as harsh to judge and as fast to exclude “outsiders” (that is, those of unlike identity-fragments) from the conversation as the old mainstream once was in judging and excluding them. In our effort to liberate, we have ended up imprisoning — imprisoning ourselves in the fractal infinity of our ever-subdividing identities, imprisoning each other in our exponentially multiplying varieties of otherness."
(Maria Popova, Brain Pickings on John O’Donohue, Walking on the Pastures of Wonder: John O’Donohue in Conversation with John Quinn, 1997)

E3.8.2_REF2_PH "The unceasing propaganda in our time for “the individual” seems to me deeply suspect, as “individuality” itself becomes more and more a synonym for selfishness. A capitalist society comes to have a vested interest in praising “individuality” and “freedom” — which may mean little more than the right to the perpetual aggrandizement of the self, and the freedom to shop, to acquire, to use up, to consume, to render obsolete.

I don’t believe there is any inherent value in the cultivation of the self. And I think there is no culture (using the term normatively) without a standard of altruism, of regard for others. I do believe there is an inherent value in extending our sense of what a human life can be. If literature has engaged me as a project, first as a reader and then as a writer, it is as an extension of my sympathies to other selves, other domains, other dreams, other words, other territories of concern."
(Susan Sontag, “The Conscience of Words”, 2001 published in At the Same Time: Essays and Speeches)

E3.8.2_REF3_PH THE "I" AS A NARCISSISTIC EXPANSION
"NAMES:
Caritatsim:
A linguistic term referring to affectionate names given to everyday objects. Fashion magazines: "The little coat that keeps you warm." [...]

I believe the purpose of caritatisms is to elevate common nouns to the status of proper nouns, or at least suggest the process. Caritatisme individualizes the object through an affective projection. It makes the object an extension of the self and christens it as unique (the ideal status of a proper noun, as the term suggests). It denotes the ultimate difference as being irreducible; yet, the ultimate difference is me. See Corneille's Medea: In this extreme misfortune—she has slaughtered her children in retaliation against Jason, who abandoned her—what is left? —Me. In absolute seclusion, what do you have left? My pencil, my chicken, my strawberries, my chocolate macaron. The name is the name of what I love; it is my name. I only name what I love. I only name what is worth naming."
(Roland Barthes, How to Live Together: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1976–1977)

E2.2.B.3.4.d.wE3.8.2.

"THE DIALECTIC OF THE MASTER AND THE SLAVE: ACCORDING TO HEGEL, IN ORDER TO REALIZE ITS OWN SPIRITUALITY, CONSCIOUSNESS MUST BE RECOGNIZED BY ANOTHER CONSCIOUSNESS.

"About Hegel: The master is unfortunately recognized in his autonomy by a consciousness that he himself does not recognize as autonomous. Therefore, he cannot be satisfied, and his autonomy is only negative. Mastery is a dead end.
The slave, however, is not bound to his condition; he wants to change it. Unlike the master, he can educate himself. What we call history is nothing but the sequence of his long efforts to obtain real freedom."
(Albert Camus)

The dialectic of the master and the slave: This retrospective expression summarizes Chapter IV of The Phenomenology of Spirit and was popularized by Alexandre Kojève's lectures. In Hegelian vocabulary, dialectic starts from Kant's concept that it allows us to think about necessary contradictions that reason conceals when it tries to think about what is beyond its capabilities. Hegel builds on this concept, believing that it applies not only to thought, but also to reality. Reality is composed of finite things that transcend themselves. Dialectic is a process in which a thing is called upon to deny its own nature, transform itself, and become something else. In a sense, Hegel was a disciple of Heraclitus because becoming governs reality.
Hegel developed dialectics because he could not conceive of life using reason alone. For him, thinking about life was the goal of philosophy. Dialectics is an attempt to develop a conception of thought equal to life, rather than simply applying concepts to it.
In order to realize its own spirituality, consciousness must be recognized by another consciousness. It must deny its singularity to access others. Man is born twice: once as a natural being and once as a spiritual being. The dialectic of mastery and servitude is a conceptual parable describing a structure found in various contexts. This structure corresponds to a primitive scene in the prehistoric, pre-social normative state (ethical, political, etc.). In this scene, two individuals facing each other have no resources other than themselves with which to relate to each other. However, this parable should not be reduced to the experience of civilized man.
In previous chapters, Hegel describes how consciousness forgets itself in an attempt to find truth in objects in the world. Consciousness does not succeed, but it becomes aware that the world is not only given to it; the way it relates to the world also depends on itself. Consciousness becomes self-conscious, taking itself as an object in the quest for truth. However, it does not succeed because it lacks a reflection of itself in the things it desires in nature. Furthermore, the consumed object disappears. Consciousness understands that it can only grasp its own truth in a relationship of recognition—in the sense of granting value to someone—in the face of an alter ego. Recognition involves proving to the other—who knows nothing about me—that one is not a mere natural being (which disappears in consumption) by engaging in a fight to the death. "It is only by risking one's life that one preserves one's freedom." This struggle demonstrates that we are not merely animals. It is not a struggle for survival to save one's skin, as with animals, but rather a struggle to be recognized as consciousness. I am willing to risk my life to demonstrate that my value surpasses that of natural life.
To gain recognition for my actions, I need others to do the same. To show that I am superior to life, I must be recognized by someone else who does the same. First and foremost, it is a fight against oneself to save one's own skin. Both can die; it is a failure of recognition. This failure demonstrates the necessity of staying alive. Then, the relationship between master and servant is established.
One consciousness goes all the way, while the other experiences the tremor of its singularity and fears death. The master first becomes master of life before becoming master of the servant—the latter is first enslaved to life. It is a three-way relationship. The first relationship of servitude is the one retained by Nietzsche and Deleuze in Nietzsche and Philosophy. The reversal of servitude by the servant's consciousness has three stages.
1. Fear of death. The master may not have valued life at its true worth. The servant is confronted by the absolute master of death, who calls his reality into question.
2. Service to others = discipline of desire through decentering: in civil society, this leads to an economic system in which people do not work solely to satisfy their own needs.
3. Work, which is the conversion of the tremor of singularity into an experience of self-transformation through a transformation of the world: this is another way in which service liberates us from animality. Rather than suppressing the natural things around me (through consumption), I make nature a reflection of spiritual activity.
These three experiences are the basis for liberation, for reconciling oneself with the world through the creation of a state based on universality. The master is trapped in his singularity.
"While the servant works for the master, his desire takes on a dimension that consists not only of the master's desire, but also contains within itself the desire of another. The servant thus rises above singularity, which is bound to the self of his natural will, and stands, in proportion to his value, higher than the master considered in his selfishness. [...] such submission of the servant's will forms the beginning of true human freedom. The trembling of the singularity of the will, the feeling of nothingness, of selfishness, the habit of obedience is a necessary moment in the formation of every human being."
Submission to the state (in accordance with Rousseauist thinking) is not coercion but obligation. Coercion is the law of the strongest. Obligation is a natural submission to an order whose legitimacy is recognized.
(Olivier Tinland in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on May 1, 2018)

Listen to the podcast in French: 
https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/quoi-hegel-quest-ce-quil-a-hegel-24-la-dialectique-du-maitre-et-de-lesclave

E3.8.2_REF4_LIT "CIRCUMSTANCES COMPEL UNITY; FOR CONVENIENCE' SAKE A MAN MUST BE A WHOLE."
"The evening hour, too, gives us the irresponsibility which darkness and lamplight bestow," she writes. "We are no longer quite ourselves. As we step out of the house on a fine evening between four and six, we shed the self our friends know us by and become part of that vast republican army of anonymous trampers, whose society is so agreeable after the solitude of one's own room.[...]
 
Or is the true self neither this nor that, neither here nor there, but something so varied and wandering that it is only when we give the rein to its wishes and let it take its way unimpeded that we are indeed ourselves? Circumstances compel unity; for convenience' sake a man must be a whole. The good citizen when he opens his door in the evening must be banker, golfer, husband, father; not a nomad wandering the desert, a mystic staring at the sky, a debauchee in the slums of San Francisco, a soldier heading a revolution, a pariah howling with scepticism and solitude. [...]"
(Virginia Woolf, Street Haunting: A London Adventure, 1930)

E3.8.2_REF5_PH DELEUZE STATES THAT THE "PROBLEM OF THE SELF... FINDS ONLY IN CULTURE A MORAL AND POLITICAL RESOLUTION." The "I" is not a natural entity found in the brain or soul; it is a construct designed for social life.
"Can we solve the problem of the self by fulfilling Hume's hope? Now, we can define the concept of subjectivity. The subject is not a quality, but rather, the qualification of a collection of ideas. Saying that the imagination is affected by principles means that any set is qualified as a partial, actual subject. Therefore, the idea of subjectivity is the reflection of affection in the imagination; it is the general rule itself. In this case, the idea is not the object of thought or the quality of a thing; it is not representative. Rather, it is a rule, a schema, or a rule of construction. Transcending the partiality of the subject, the idea of subjectivity includes the principle and rule of possible agreement between subjects in each collection considered. Thus, the problem of the self, which has no solution at the level of understanding, finds a moral and political resolution only in culture. As we have seen, origin and affection cannot unite in a self since, at this level, the difference between principles and fantasy persists. The self is constituted by the synthesis of affection itself and its reflection: an affection that fixes the imagination and an imagination that reflects affection."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.8.2_REF5.1_PH THE REACTION OF THE MIND TO CIRCUMSTANCES "IS CALLED INVENTION." IN HUME'S PHILOSOPHY, THIS "INVENTION" IS THE CREATION OF ARTIFICE (JUSTICE, SOCIETY, CULTURE) TO REGULATE THE PASSIONS. The self is not a natural given; it is a social/institutional invention.
“What does the mind do once a subject has been chosen? It "favors certain ideas over others." Going beyond does not mean anything else. If the mind can "revive," it is undoubtedly because principles establish relationships between ideas and activate the mind by giving the impression's liveliness the laws of communication, distribution, and apportionment. A relationship between two ideas is the quality by which an impression communicates its liveliness to an idea. However, this liveliness is not a product of principles itself. It is a characteristic of the impression, the good and the given of the imagination. It is the mind's origin and its most fundamental aspect. [...]

Not all relationships are equal from the point of view of human nature. We know they do not all have the same effect of "reinforcing and enlivening our ideas," and legitimate belief necessarily passes through causality. Any relationship between two ideas is the quality by which an impression enlivens the connected idea, but the connection must be firm, constant, and unchanging. Furthermore, impressions not only force relationships; they also feign and fabricate them at will. Thus, the subject is pressured and tormented by mirages and fantasies. His passions and current dispositions lead him to believe fictions. In short, we are not only subjects; we are also something else. We are still egos, always slaves to our origins. There are illegitimate beliefs and absurd general ideas. Principles establish relationships between ideas, which, for the impression, are also laws of communication and liveliness. Yet, liveliness must conform to these laws without exception. This is why, in the schematism of knowledge, there are always excessive rules that must be corrected by other rules: the schematism of cause must conform to experience, and the schematism of the general idea must conform to space, under the dual aspect that defines it, geometric structure, arithmetic unity. Thus, a whole polemic continues in the self between the subject and fantasy, or rather in the subject itself, between the principles of human nature and the liveliness of the imagination, between principles and fictions. We know how, for each object of knowledge, fiction can be effectively corrected, even if it means being reborn with the next object. But we also know how, for the world in general in which every object is known, fiction takes hold of principles and radically puts them at its service. [...]
This is because she and he are reflected in the imagination, in fantasy. The principles of passion do not fix the mind without the passions resounding, spreading, and reflecting in the mind. The mind's reaction to the totality of circumstances is one with this reflection of passion in the mind; such a reaction is productive, such a reflection is called invention."
(Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, 1977)

E3.8.2_REF6_PH  I_What is sympathy according to Hume

"PERSONAL IDENTITY IS A SOCIAL CONSTRUCT GENERATED BY CERTAIN PASSIONS... THERE IS NO SELF INDEPENDENT OF OTHERS."
"Hume does not oppose reason to passions. Rather, he subordinates understanding to the impulsive movements that passions give to human action. In fact, he says that "reason is, and ought only to be, the slave of the passions." Passion is the primary force that motivates action; all actions stem from emotion. Understanding merely indicates the means to satisfy desire.
 
Passions also play a role in uniting people. They socialize us, including passions that, at first glance, seem to be antagonistic to social bonds, such as envy and malice. Hume conceives of social bonds not in terms of contracts but in terms of the circulation of emotions. According to him, personal identity is fictitious; there is no self independent of others. Personal identity is a social construct generated by certain passions thanks to the principle of sympathy, which we now call empathy, or the ability to feel the emotions of others. Thus, our subjectivities are open to one another; the mind is merely a theater in which emotions pass without a substantial unifying force. Passions such as pride, humility, love, and hate produce the idea of the self.

The following is an excerpt from A Treatise of Human Nature, Volume 2, which presents a portrait of a man who is inherently social and offers a critical response to Hobbes's position that man is a wolf to man:
"In all creatures, that prey not upon others, and are not agitated with violent passions, there appears a remarkable desire of company, which associates them together, without any
advantages they can ever propose to reap from their union. This is still more conspicuous in man, as being the creature of the universe, who has the most ardent desire of society, and is fitted for it by the most advantages. We can form no wish, which has not a reference to society. A perfect solitude is, perhaps, the greatest punishment we can suffer. Every pleasure languishes when enjoyed a-part from company, and every pain becomes more cruel and intolerable. Whatever other passions we may be actuated by; pride, ambition, avarice, curiosity, revenge or lust; the soul or animating principle of them all is sympathy; nor would they have any force, were we to abstract entirely from the thoughts and sentiments of others. Let all the powers and elements of nature conspire to serve and obey one man: Let the sun rise and set at his command: The sea and rivers roll as he pleases, and the earth furnish spontaneously
whatever may be useful or agreeable to him: He will still be miserable, till you give him some one person at least, with whom he may share his happiness, and whose esteem and friendship he may enjoy."

Since understanding is merely theater, the most vivid impressions enliven the mind. These impressions are most vivid in interaction with others because it is through interaction that we constitute ourselves.
On a political level, this leads him to believe that we can think of a natural genesis, a natural history, of the institution based on the principles of human nature without causing a revolution that would bring about a rupture. The break between a state of nature and a state of law makes no sense to an empiricist philosophy. How could one conceive of the institution of a state in a state of nature, where one lives in isolation? For H., it is the principle of sympathy that will be refined, starting from the family unit and evolving toward the formation of the state in stages through conventions and inventions. Sympathy, restricted to the family, broadens in the context of war between clans. At this point, we must invent a new artifice to overcome the impasse. We see a self-correction of sympathy based on experience within the family. Conventions can be established without legal institutions. People broaden their perspective based on the satisfaction of their family. We overcome partiality by conversing with those who are most different from us through the contagion of passions."
(Céline Bonicco-Donato in the program Les Chemins de la Philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on October, 17, 2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/faut-il-preferer-la-destruction-du-monde-a-l-egratignure-de-son-doigt-9500672

E3.8.2_REF7_PH  A_Gustave Courbet_Charles Baudelaire_1848-1849

THE DANDY DOES NOT EXIST IN A VACUUM; HE EXISTS ONLY "BY FINDING [HIS EXISTENCE] IN THE EXPRESSION OF OTHERS' FACES."
"Much more than the cult of the individual, romanticism inaugurates the cult of living are still capable in a world dedicated to death, romantic rebellion looked for a solution in the attitude that it itself assumed. The attitude assembled, in aesthetic unity, all mankind who were in the hands of fate and about to be destroyed by divine violence. The human being who is condemned to death is, at least, magnificent before he disappears, and his magnificence is his justification. It is an established fact, the only one that can be thrown in the petrified face of the God of hate. The impassive rebel does not flinch before the eyes of God. "Nothing," says Milton, "will change this determined mind, this high disdain born of an offended conscience." Everything is drawn or rushes toward the void, but even though man is humiliated, he is obstinate and at least preserves his pride. A baroque romantic, discovered by Raymond Queneau, claims that the aim of all intellectual life is to become God. This romantic is really a little ahead of his time. The aim, at that time, was only to equal God and remain on His level. He is not destroyed, but by incessant effort He is refused any act of submission. Dandyism is a degraded form of asceticism.
The dandy creates his own unity by aesthetic means. But it is an aesthetic of singularity and of negation. "To live and die before a mirror": that, according to Baudelaire, was the dandy's slogan. It is indeed a coherent slogan. The dandy is, by occupation, always in opposition. He can only exist by defiance. Up to now man derived his coherence from his Creator. But from the moment that he consecrates his rupture with Him, he finds himself delivered over to the fleeting moment, to the passing days, and to wasted sensibility. Therefore he must take himself in hand. The dandy rallies his forces and creates a unity for himself by the very violence of his refusal. Profligate, like all people without a rule of life, he is coherent as an actor. But an actor implies a public; the dandy can only play a part by setting himself up in opposition. He can only be sure of his own existence by finding it in the expression of others' faces. Other people are his mirror. A mirror that
quickly becomes clouded, it is true, since human capacity for attention is limited. It must be ceaselessly stimulated, spurred on by provocation. The dandy, therefore, is always compelled to astonish. Singularity is his vocation, excess his way to perfection. Perpetually incomplete, always on the fringe of things, he compels others to create him, while denying their values. He plays at life because he is unable to live it. He plays at it until he dies, except for the moments when he is alone and without a mirror. For the dandy, to be alone is not to exist. The romantics talked so grandly about solitude only because it was their real horror, the one thing they could not bear."
(Albert Camus, The Rebel, An Essay on Man in Revolt, 1951)

E2.2.A.1.2.a.iv.wE3.8.2. "[Persons]
A person’s roles and his place in the narrative devolve from the choices that place him in a structural system related to others. The person thus comes to stand behind his roles, to select them and to be judged by his choices and his capacities to act out his personae in a total structure that is the unfolding of his drama.

The idea of a person is the idea of a unified center of choice and action, the unit of legal and theological responsibility. Having chosen, a person acts, and so is actionable, liable. It is in the idea of action that the legal and the theatrical sources of the concept of person come together. [...]

If judgment summarizes a life … then that life must have a unified location. Since they choose from their natures or are chosen by their stories, neither characters nor figures need be equipped with a will, not to mention a free will… The actions of characters and figures do no emerge from the exercise of a single faculty of power: there is no need for a single source of responsibility… Persons are required to unify the capacity for choice with the capacities for action. [...]

It is the intentions, the capacities for choice rather than the total configuration of traits which defines the person. Here the stage is set for identity crises, for wondering who one really is, behind the multifold variety of actions and roles. And the search for that core person is not a matter of curiosity; it is a search for the principles by which choices are to be made."
(Amélie Rorty, The Identities of Persons, 1976)

E2.2.A.1.2.a.v.wE3.8.2. "[Selves]
The two strands that were fused in the concept of person diverge again: When we focus on persons as sources of decisions, the ultimate locus of responsibility, the unity of thought and action, we must come to think of them as souls and minds. When we think of them as possessors of rights and powers, we come to think of them as selves. It is not until each of these has been transformed into the concept of individuality that the two strands are woven together again. […]

When a society has changed so that individuals acquire their rights by virtue of their powers, rather than having their powers defined by their rights, the concept of person has been transformed to a concept of self… The quality of an individual self is determined by his qualities: they are his capital, to invest well or foolishly. [...]

Because persons are primary agents of principle, their integrity requires freedom; because they are judged liable, their powers must be autonomous. But when this criterion for personhood is carried to its logical extreme, the scope of agency moves inward, away from social dramas, to the choices of the soul, or to the operations of the mind. […]

From character as structured dispositions, we come to soul as pure agency, unfathomable, inexpressible. [...]

Judgments of persons are moral; judgments of souls are theological; judgments of selves are economic and political. Societies of persons are constructed to assure the rights of choice and action; they emerge from a contract of agents; societies of selves are also formed to protect and guarantee the rights of their members. But when the members of a society achieve their rights by virtue of their possessions, the protection of rights requires the protection of property, even though in principle everyone is equally entitled to the fruits of his labors and protection under law. […]

The concerns of selves are their interests; their obligations are the duties with which they are taxed or charged. The grammar and the semantics of selfhood reveal the possessive forms. Whatever will come to be regarded as crucial property, or the means to it, will be regarded as the focus of rights; the alienation of property becomes an attack on the integrity if not actually the preservation of the self. [...]

The conscious possession of experiences [is] the final criterion of identity. The continuity of the self is established by memory; disputes about the validity of memory reports will hang on whether the claimant had as hers the original experience. Puzzles about identity will be described as puzzles about whether it is possible to transfer, or to alienate memory (that is, the retention of one’s own experience) without destroying the self. [...]

There is difficulty in describing the core possessor, the owner of experiences who is not herself any set of them. One can speak of characters as sets of traits without looking for a center; but it is more difficult to think of bundles of properties without an owner, especially when the older idea of the person as an agent and decision-maker is still implicit. It is presumed that the self as an owner is also endowed with capabilities to choose and to act."
(Amélie Rorty, The Identities of Persons, 1976)

E3.8.3. The Great Theatre: Masks, Doubles, and the Performance of Existence. How do we live as a "social fiction"?

E3.8.3_REF1_CUR A_Mame-Diarra Niang_Morphologie du rêve n6_2021

THE SELF IS “A TERRITORY MADE UP OF WELL-PRESERVED MEMORIES AND ERASURES”
“In her recent photographs, French artist and photographer Mame-Diarra Niang explores the identity of black bodies, rejecting any attempt at definition or narration based on centuries of Western representation. She seeks to abstract this identity through what she describes as forms of non-portraiture.

In this series, begun during lockdown, the artist photographs and re-photographs her screen, with each new shot blurring the outlines further, to the point of transforming these bodies into patches of color. Little by little, subjects disappear, the self dissolves in this territory made up of well-preserved memories that blur, "like a territory made up of well-preserved memories and erasures".
(Curatorship: Musée de l’Orangerie, Paris)

E3.8.3_REF2_PO I_Architect´s model

“DESIGN
Here is the day, sun, gulls
backlit and cresting,
a jackhammer
suggesting I’m
here but not really
in it, I’m more
representative
of a person in early
ambient fall,
near a fountain, and Thursday
farmers’ market –
like an architect’s model,
precise, small me,
stuck on a bench
reading a book, lending an air
of things going too fast.”
(Lia Purpura, It shouldn’t have been beautiful, 2015)

E3.8.3_REF4_PH  I_Confirmation bias

"Jean-Paul Sartre's Being and Nothingness is sometimes described as the bible of existentialism. At its core is the notion of Bad Faith. For this episode of the Philosophy Bites podcast Sebastian Gardner, author of a recent book about Being and Nothingness, explains what Sartre meant by Bad Faith: mostly a condition of self-deception.
In the example of the café waiter, he identifies him as immersing himself in his role and his function in a way that brings him an illicit satisfaction - experiencing himself as a thing, an object with determinate properties, denying that he is free. He is playing the game of automation of consciousness.
In the vignette of the man trying to seduce a woman in a café, she is treating her hand as an object when she lets the man touch it without withdrawing - this serves as a self-deception strategy since she has not yet decided if she wants to go further in the relationship - she puts off to later that decision by becoming mindless of her body.
In the vignette of the homosexual debating with himself if he should acknowledge his past an call himself an homosexual or should disavow the facts and believe he can change - he illustrates that our past in some sense does determine what we are and also that we are free to reinvent ourselves. Sartre expresses this paradox saying the human subject's consciousness is non self-identical. How is it possible to exhibit yourself a certain way up to a certain point and yet to retain the capacity to change course? This capacity is grounded on the 2 dimensions of facticity and transcendence. Facticity includes the heritage of culture but also of on'es previous actions. Transcendence is the capacity to go beyond facticity.
Bad faith as the term is used by Sartre is not a moral term, but it is an ethical concept to convince us to operate a practical reorientation: it is not a descriptive metaphysics, it is a revisionary one (he is not describing the way the world is empirically, his philosophy has a near religious dimension to it). He is opposed to common sense in his system."
(Sebastian Gardner on Jean-Paul Sartre on Bad Faith;, Philosophy Bites)

Listen to the episode: http://philosophybites.com/2009/02/sebastian-gardner-on-jeanpaul-sartre-on-bad-faith.html

E3.8.3_REF5_CUR A_Maria Lassnig_Self-Portrait Under Plastic_1972 ; A_Maria Lassnig_Lady with brain_circa 1990-1999 /Maria Lassnig/

"The sensational « Self-Portrait Under Plastic » by the revolutionary Austrian-born artist Maria Lassnig, offers a great look into the artist's major investigation of the self. Together with her close observation of the physical presence of the body, Lassnig described this introspective process and state as « body awareness ». This aspect of her practice remained key for the development of her work, along with constant explorations of painting in relation to her internal world, whilst prioritizing how this might feel rather than look. She considered her inner world full of endless possibilities especially when compared to expressing external realities which she perceived as holding less potential.
In a way, she considered the external eventually becoming part of an introspective and predominant process. With her psychologically-charged « Self-Portrait Under Plastic » she precisely puts into question this illusion of boundary. She does this not only in regards to the relationship between interior and exterior but by using the plastic on her face as a way of reflecting upon the medium of painting itself: its limitations, illusionistic properties and how these may relate to the way we might at times perceive ourselves and the world around us."
(Ambar Quijano)

E3.8.3_REF6_PH MONTAIGNE TREATS HIS SOCIAL IDENTITY AS A STRANGER OR A GARMENT TO BE WORN AND REMOVED, THEREBY PROTECTING HIS INNER "CITADEL."
"All that seems relevant now and occupies my thoughts on Montaigne today is this: how, in a time so reminiscent of our own, did he liberate himself inwardly and how, in reading him, can we fortify ourselves by his example? In him I see the ancestor, the protector and the friend of each “homme libre” on earth, the most adept master at this new yet eternal science, the preserving of oneself above all other concerns. Few men on earth have ever fought with such faithfulness and tenacity to preserve their most intimate selves, their “essences”, from all impurities, from all toxins left by the rank spume of an epoch’s storm waves, and fewer still have managed to rescue from the time in which they lived, and for all time, their deepest selves.

This struggle that led Montaigne to safeguard his interior freedom, a struggle that in his case was surely more conscious and more determined than that of any other human being, had nothing heroic or sententious about it. It would be an injustice to include Montaigne with that group of poets and thinkers who, armed only with the word, fought for the “liberté de l’homme”. He has nothing of the forceful tirades or lofty outbursts of a Schiller or a Byron, nothing of the pugnacity of a Voltaire. He may have permitted himself a rueful smile at the idea of wanting to impose something as deeply personal as inner freedom on individuals, let alone on the masses, and he profoundly detested professional reformers, theoreticians and peddlers of ideology. He knew only too well the colossal task represented by this simple idea: to safeguard one’s independence at the core of oneself. His fight limits itself to the defensive, to defend this most intimate bastion, which Goethe named the “citadel”, where entry is forbidden to all other men. His tactic was to be as inconspicuous as possible, to attract the minimum of attention through outward appearance, to travel the world as if wearing a mask, to seek out only the path that would lead to himself.

Thus, Montaigne does not provide what one might term a biography. He never offended anyone, because he never pushed himself forward, never sought an audience or endorsement. Seen from the outside, he appeared to be a model citizen, a functionary, a married man, a Catholic, a man who discreetly paid his dues to the world. For his entourage, he assumed the mask of self-effacement so as to bloom inside himself, wondering at the nuances, the play of different colours over his soul. He was at every moment disposed to lend, never to give. Always, whatever his mode of living, he kept for himself alone the most authentic and most subtle element of his being. He left the rest to prattle on, to move with the herd, to get borne aloft, to preach and parade; he left the world to follow its chaotic crazed paths and only concerned himself with one thing: to be rational within himself, to remain human in an inhuman time, to remain free in the vortex of pandemonium. He let them have their say, those who mockingly accused him of indifference, indecision and cowardice; he let others relish their surprise at seeing him relinquish his duties and honours. His nearest and dearest, who knew him best, never doubted the perseverance, the clearsightedness and the subtlety with which, in the shadow of public affairs, he applied himself to the sole aim to which he was committed: to live his own life, and not simply to live."
(Stefan Zweig, Montaigne, 1942)

E3.8.3_REF7_LIT "THE OTHER ONE, THE ONE CALLED BORGES, IS THE ONE THINGS HAPPEN TO. I walk through the streets of Buenos Aires and stop for a moment, perhaps mechanically now, to look at the arch of an entrance hall and the grillwork on the gate; I know of Borges from the mail and see his name on a list of professors or in a biographical dictionary. I like hourglasses, maps, eighteenth-century typography, the taste of coffee and the prose of Stevenson; he shares these preferences, but in a vain way that turns them into the attributes of an actor. It would be an exaggeration to say that ours is a hostile relationship; I live, let myself go on living, so that Borges may contrive his literature, and this literature justifies me. It is no effort for me to confess that he has achieved some valid pages, but those pages cannot save me, perhaps because what is good belongs to no one, not even to him, but rather to the language and to tradition. Besides, I am destined to perish, definitively, and only some instant of myself can survive in him. Little by little, I am giving over everything to him, though I am quite aware of his perverse custom of falsifying and magnifying things. Spinoza knew that all things long to persist in their being; the stone eternally wants to be a stone and the tiger a tiger. I shall remain in Borges, not in myself (if it is true that I am someone), but I recognize myself less in his books than in many others or in the laborious strumming of a guitar. Years ago I tried to free myself from him and went from the mythologies of the suburbs to the games with time and infinity, but those games belong to Borges now and I shall have to imagine other things. Thus my life is a flight and I lose everything and everything belongs to oblivion, or to him.
I do not know which of us has written this page."
(Jorge Luis Borges, Borges and I, Labyrinths)

E3.8.3_REF8_LIT TO ENDURE LIFE, POWYS ARGUES WE MUST SPLIT: WE MUST PLAY THE PART WHILE SIMULTANEOUSLY WATCHING OURSELVES PLAY IT. We become the audience to our own social fiction, finding "consolation" in the distance between the actor (the social self) and the awareness watching it.

“I think that down at the bottom of my being has been concealed from pretty early days a deep distrust and a shrewd suspicion of that solidity of the objective world that most people take for granted. I was always superstitious—at one time I even believed in Hell—but I am pretty sure that the more I became true to my subtler instincts the more I regarded the whole astronomical universe with a certain detachment, regarded it in fact as the mere material stage for playing whatever romantic, picturesque, or fantastical rôle a person’s life-illusion might arbitrarily select. It has always appealed to me — that legendary last word of Cesar Augustus: 

“Have I not played the Farce well? Put out the lights: ring down the curtain! Plaudite et vale! “ 

Deep, deep, deep must have sunken into my soul that grandiose acting in the presence of the gods and of Fate, of those classic Greeks and Romans! My mania for the sceptical Shakespeare, who like his own more sceptical master Montaigne, had a passion for these consummate actors, encouraged this predilection in me. Oh, how I revelled in every line of his Julius Cesar; and how startled I was when, in reading Dante, I found Brutus and Cassius thrust down to the bottom of Hell! 

At a very early age somebody read to me Church’s Stories  from Homer, and I found out that those more primeval and more elemental heroes were just as addicted to this vision of themselves as acting a spectacular part before gods and men, whether in exultation or desperation, as were the Greeks and Romans of the historical times. Thus I learned at a very early age what a consolation in life it is to enjoy things and to endure things as an actor; that is to say, not hugger-mugger, and in brute unconsciousness, but as though in default of any god or even of any fellow mortal, you could play out your part before your own awareness, and be to the end both performer and audience! “
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934, Faber and Faber, p. 121-122)

E3.8.3_REF9_CUR A_Sasha Gordon_Garden Troll_2021

EUPHORIC NARRATIVES THAT RANGE FROM THE FAMILIAR TO THE UNCANNY.
"Born in The Bronx, Sasha has described herself as ‘biracial,’ given her Korean and Polish descent. She shares that a sense of belonging didn’t come easily for her whilst « feeling out of touch with her Asian identity until recently », and that growing up around a predominantly white and heteronormative neighborhood hindered her confusion further with being both queer and biracial.
« After years of being uncomfortable of my appearance and culture, I want to make up for lost time » later adding that she feels like she has to be « a certain type of Asian woman, a certain type of queer person, a certain type of body size ». Describing herself as being « hyper-aware » of her experiences, it is through this hyper-awareness that she closely examines compositional details and revisits her memories to develop intimate and at times euphoric narratives that range from the familiar to the uncanny."
(Ambar Quijano)

E3.8.3_REF10_PH WE BECOME STRANGERS TO OUR IMMEDIATE REALITY BECAUSE WE ARE TOO BUSY MANAGING THE "BURDEN OF SUBJECTIVITY" AND THE PERFORMANCE OF OUR SOCIAL ROLES.
"As I have suggested, the diagnosis presupposed in Metatheatre that modern man lives with an increasing burden of subjectivity, at the expense of his sense of the reality of the world - is not new. Nor do works for the theater constitute the main texts which disclose this attitude and its correlative idea, reason as self-manipulation and role-playing. The two greatest documents of this attitude are Montaigne's Essays and Machiavelli's The Prince - both manuals of strategy which assume a gulf between the "public self" (the role) and the "private self" (the true self). The value of Abel's book lies in the forthright application of this diagnosis to the drama. He is quite right, for example, in arguing that most of the plays of Shakespeare which their author, and everyone else since, have called tragedies are not, strictly speaking, tragedies at all. In fact, Abel could have gone even further. Not only are most of the putative tragedies really "metaplays"; so are most of the histories and comedies. The principal plays of Shakespeare are plays about self-consciousness, about characters not acting so much as dramatizing themselves in roles. Prince Hal is the man of perfected self-consciousness and self-control, triumphing over the man of rash, unself-conscious integrity, Hotspur, and over the sentimental, cowardly, self-conscious man of pleasure, Falstaff. Achilles and Oedipus do not see themselves as, but are, hero and king. But Hamlet and Henry V see themselves as acting parts - the part of the avenger, the part of the heroic and confident king leading his troops to battle. Shakespeare's fondness for the play-within-a-play and for putting his characters into disguise for long stretches of the story clearly partakes of the style of metatheater. From Prospero to the Police Chief in Genet's The Balcony, the personages of metatheater are characters in search of an action."
(Susan Sontag, The death of tragedy, 1963)

E3.8.3_REF11_CUR A_Lynn Hershman Leeson_Roberta Construction Chart number 1_1975

"Lynn Hershman Leeson created, performed and documented an alter ego, Roberta Breitmore from 1973 to 1978 to 'focus on the blurriness between fiction and reality'. During her four-year existence, Roberta Breitmore had a bank account and library card, rented an apartment and went on dates. She did not plan for the character to be so developed but 'when you start to define how you make somebody real, she needs to be fleshed out and have a history. Roberta Construction Chart #1 gives detailed instructions on how to create Roberta's appearance. It doubles as a visualisation of 'femininity as masquerade, highlighting the tropes and traits that tend to be associated with femininity."
(Curatorship: Tate Modern, London)

E3.8.3_REF12_CUR  V_Mathilde ter Heijne_Mathilde, Mathilde_2000 ; V_Mathilde ter Heijne_Number one_2002 /Mathilde ter Heijne/

MATHILDE TER HEIJNE USES A "DOUBLE" (OFTEN A MANNEQUIN IN HER WORK) TO INHABIT SPECIFIC ROLES, SUCH AS THE "VICTIM." SHE EXPRESSES A "SIMULTANEOUS IDENTIFICATION WITH AND REJECTION OF THE ROLE."
"The tension inherent in ter Heijne’s prominent use of the double, as already employed in earlier installations, such as ‘Mathilde, Mathilde…’ (2000) clearly reaches its climax in 'Number One' (2002). The double does not only reveal the simultaneous identification with and rejection of the role of the victim, but also displays the fictitious character of the scenery. The artist’s failure of full identification and the shift of pain onto the double convey ter Heijne’s artistic strategy of self-questioning, not only in her role as an artist, but also in her social, political and private role as a woman."
(arndtfineart.com)

Watch the 4'27" video on Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/52222965


E2.2.A.1.2.a.ii.wE3.8.3. "[Characters]
Since the elements out of which characters are composed are repeatable and their configurations can be reproduced, a society of characters is in principle a society of repeatable and indeed replaceable individuals.  [...]
To know what sort of character a person is, is to know what sort of life is best suited to bring out his potentialities and functions… Not all characters are suited to the same sorts of lives: there is no ideal type for them all… If one tries to force the life of a bargainer on the character of a philosopher, one is likely to encounter trouble, sorrow, and the sort of evil that comes from mismatching life and temperament. Characters formed within one society and living in circumstances where their dispositions are no longer needed — characters in time of great social change — are likely to be tragic. Their virtues lie useless or even foiled; they are no longer recognized for what they are; their motives and actions are misunderstood. The magnanimous man in a petty bourgeois society is seen as a vain fool; the energetic and industrious man in a society that prizes elegance above energy is seen as a bustling boor; the meditative person in an expansive society is seen as melancholic… Two individuals of the same character will fare differently in different polities, not because their characters will change through their experiences (though different aspects will become dominant or recessive) but simply because a good fit of character and society can conduce to well-being and happiness, while a bad fit produces misery and rejection. [...]


To be a character” is to maintain a few qualities, nourish them to excess until they dominate and dictate all others. A character is delineated and thus generally delimited. To “have character” is to have reliable qualities, to hold tightly to them through the temptations to swerve and change. A person of character is neither bribed nor corrupted; he stands fast, is steadfast. […]

Because characters are public persons, even their private lives can have universal form, general significance. The dramatic character, writ large, can represent for everyman what only later came to be thought of as the inner life of some; it can portray the myth, the conflicts, reversals and discoveries of each person, each polis."
(Amélie Rorty, The Identities of Persons, 1976)

E2.2.A.1.2.a.iii.wE3.8.3. "[Figures]
A figure is neither formed by nor owns experiences: his figurative identity shapes the significances of the events in his life. […]

Individuals who regard themselves as figures watch the unfolding of their lives following the patterns of their archetypes… They form the narratives of their lives and make their choices according to the pattern…

In contrast with the wholly external perspective on characters, the concept of a figure introduces the germ of what will become a distinction between the inner and the outer person. An individual’s perspective on his model, his idealized real figure, is originally externally presented, but it becomes internalized, becomes the internal model of self-representation."
(Amélie Rorty, The Identities of Persons, 1976)

E2.2.A.1.2.a.vi.wE3.8.3. "[Individuals]
From the tensions in the definition of the alienable properties of selves, and from the corruptions in societies of selves — the divergence of practice from ideological commitments — comes the invention of individuality. It begins with conscience and ends with consciousness.

Unlike characters and figures, individuals actively resist typing: they represent the universal mind of rational beings, or the unique private voice. Individuals are indivisible entities… Invented as a preserve of integrity, an autonomous ens, an individual transcends and resists what is binding and oppressive in society and does so from an original natural position. Although in its inception, individuality revives the idea of person, the rights of persons are formulated in society, while the rights of individuals are demanded of society. The contrast between the inner and outer person becomes the contrast between the individual and the social mask, between nature and culture.

A society of individuals is quite different from one composed of selves. Individuals contract to assure the basic rights to the development of moral and intellectual gifts, as well as legal protection of self and property. Because a society of individuals is composed of indivisible autonomous units, from whose natures — their minds and conscience — come the principles of justice, their rights are not property; they cannot be exchanged, bartered. Their rights and their qualities are their very essence, inalienable. [...]

Being an individual requires having a room of one’s own, not because it is one’s possession, but because only there, in solitude, away from the pressure of others, can one develop the features and styles that differentiate one’s own being from others. Integrity comes to be associated with difference; this idea, always implicit in individuality, of preserving one’s right against the encroachment of others within one’s own society, emerges as dominant… Conscientious consciousness is then the transparent eye that illuminates the substance of social life."
(Amélie Rorty, The Identities of Persons, 1976)

E3.9. "De-coincidence": The Liberation of "Standing Outside". True self-awareness is the act of letting go of our fixed "story lines."

E3.9.1. The Trap of the "Story Line": Coincidence as Stagnation. How the Western/Greek obsession with "essence," "definition," and the construction of a fixed "Ego" or "story line" creates a sclerosis of the self.

E3.9.1_REF1_PH “WE CANNOT BE IN THE PRESENT AND RUN OUR STORY LINES AT THE SAME TIME, […] In fact, anyone who stands on the edge of the unknown, fully in the present without reference point, experiences groundlessness”. We should cultivate intimacy with fear, as this courageous acceptance ultimately dissolves our dramas and opens us to truth.
“Intimacy with Fear
Fear is a natural reaction to moving closer to the truth.
Embarking on the spiritual journey is like getting into a very small boat and setting out on the ocean to search for unknown lands. With wholehearted practice comes inspiration, but sooner or later we will also encounter fear. For all we know, when we get to the horizon, we are going to drop off the edge of the world. Like all explorers, we are drawn to discover what's waiting out there without knowing yet if we have the courage to face it.
If we become interested in Buddhism and decide to find out what it has to offer, we'll soon discover that there are different slants on how we can proceed. With insight meditation we begin practicing mindfulness, being fully present with all our activities and thoughts. With Zen practice we hear teachings on emptiness and are challenged to connect with the open, unbounded clarity of mind. The vajrayana teachings introduce us to the notion of working with the energy of all situations, seeing whatever arises as inseparable from the awakened state. Any of these approaches might hook us and fuel our enthusiasm to explore further, but if we want to go beneath the surface and practice without hesitation, it is inevitable that at some point we will experience fear.
Fear is a universal experience. Even the smallest insect feels it. We wade in the tidal pools and put our finger near the soft, open bodies of sea anemones and they close up. Everything spontaneously does that. It's not a terrible thing that we feel fear when faced with the unknown. It is part of being alive, something we all share. We react against the possibility of loneliness, of death, of .not having anything to hold on to. Fear is a natural reaction to moving closer to the truth. 
If we commit ourselves to staying right where we are, then our experience becomes very vivid. Things become very clear when there is nowhere to escape. During a long retreat, I had what seemed to me the earthshaking revelation that we cannot be in the present and run our story lines at the same time! It sounds pretty obvious, I know, but when you discover something like this for yourself, it changes you. Impermanence becomes vivid in the present moment; so do compassion and wonder and courage. And so does fear. In fact, anyone who stands on the edge of the unknown, fully in the present without reference point, experiences groundlessness. That's when our understanding goes deeper, when we find that the present moment is a pretty vulnerable place and that this can be completely unnerving and completely tender at the same time.
When we begin our exploration, we have all kinds of ideals and expectations. We are looking for answers that will satisfy a hunger we've felt for a very long time. But the last thing we want is a further introduction to the boogeyman. Of course, people do try to warn us. I remember when I first received meditation instruction, the woman told me the technique and guidelines on how to practice and then said, "But please don't go away from here thinking that meditation is a vacation from irritation." Somehow all the warnings in the world don't quite convince us. In fact they draw us closer.
What we're talking about is getting to know fear, becoming familiar with fear, looking it right in the eye-not as a way to solve problems, but as a complete undoing of old ways of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and thinking. The truth is that when we really begin to do this, we're going to be continually humbled. There's not going to be much room for the arrogance that holding on to ideals can bring. The arrogance that inevitably does arise is going to be continually shot down by our own courage to step forward a little further.
The kinds of discoveries that are made through practice have nothing to do with believing in anything. They have much more to do with having the courage to die, the courage to die continually. Instructions on mindfulness or emptiness or working with energy all point to the same thing: being right on the spot nails us. It nails us right to the point of time and space that we are in. When we stop there and don't act out, don't repress, don't blame it on anyone else, and also don't blame it on ourselves, then we meet with an open-ended question that has no conceptual answer. We also encounter our heart. As one student so eloquently put it, "Buddha nature, cleverly disguised as fear, kicks our ass into being receptive. [...]
To stay with that shakiness-to stay with a broken heart, with a rumbling stomach, with the feeling of hopelessness and wanting to get revenge-that is the path of true awakening. Sticking with that uncertainty, getting the knack of relaxing in the midst of chaos, learning not to panic-this is the spiritual path. Getting the knack of catching ourselves, of gently and compassionately catching ourselves, is the path of the warnor. We catch ourselves one zillion times as once again, whether we like it or not, we harden into resentment, bitterness, righteous indignation-harden in any way, even into a sense of relief, a sense of inspiration."
(Pema Chodron, When Things Fall Apart Heart Advice for Difficult Times, 1996)

E3.9.1_REF2_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN CONTRASTS THE GREEK PHILOSOPHICAL FIXATION ON THE ASSIGNABLE—WHERE "BEING" AND KNOWLEDGE DEPEND ON ESTABLISHING FIXED LIMITS AND IDENTITIES—with the evasive, an alternative mode of effectiveness that operates productively precisely by escaping definition, remaining unconfined, and dissolving the rigid consistency of the "self."

"Evasive (vs. assignable)"
1. If there is one Greek concept rooted in ontology or, as I would call it, a 'common ground' within which the Greeks thought, it is the idea that the more something is determined, the more it 'is'; determination creates 'being.' This 'term,' forming a limit by marking boundaries, saves us from the inconsistency of the unlimited apeiron (in Philebus). Thus, the indefinite is simultaneously that which has no limit or end and that which is vague, undecided, and uncertain, resulting in a diluted sense of being. It is between marked beginnings and ends, arche-telos, cut out as singular beings, that everything takes on consistency and constitutes itself as essence-presence, ousia. Consequently, Greek thought's defining feature is assigning and conferring on each thing its theoretical place, "in itself," which establishes its relevance and forms its "property." This means it can be a "self" in relation to itself, "in itself as itself" (hauto kath'hauto), detached from the rest of being, and stable and circumscribed by its quality. Even if it is volatile or subtle, such as an exhalation, a draft of air, or foam, the phenomenon possesses a "nature" and therefore a definite specificity in the eyes of the Greeks. However difficult it may be to identify or define, there remains a "that" with its own unity, which gives it a foundation as an entity, no matter the relationship, atmosphere, or movement.
Let us say that the Greeks had this fixation, in the various senses of the word. Rigorous knowledge, as knowledge of identity, is only possible to the extent that it is both limited and attributed, thus allowing for predication. Logos, or discourse-reason, is only legitimate as a segment determined by its beginning and end. It is the segment between what must be posited first as a "principle," even if it is axiomatic and cannot be questioned, and what must be posited as its end. This end is both its goal and limit, which cannot be exceeded. Without this limit, the discourse is "vain." According to Aristotle, it is necessary to "stand" between the two and "stop" there. The formula, by its insistence, is symptomatic of Greek anxiety in the face of the boundless. Thus, knowing is first determining, in which "thinking" and "being" are considered logically coextensive and overlapping, according to Parmenides's great statement. If there is something unassignable within Greek thought, should it still be assigned? This place is not a place but a universal receptacle, a "third kind" situated between the intelligible model and its copy in the sensible. In this "first this," a formless kind because it is indeterminate, each thing is cut out to be this or that by determining itself and affirming its quality (khôra in the Timaeus). Otherwise, this unassignable refers us to delirium, mania, divine pneuma, or a Good "beyond" essence itself, transcending all apprehension. Between these two possibilities lies the zone of relevance based on the definition of identity and "Being" as knowledge. As much as there is 'being,' there is possible assignment: the 'Ideas' themselves have their 'proper place,' the 'topos ton eidon,' that 'there,' standing out in the celestial distance from the plain of truth.
However, contrary to our intellectual habits, we must think backwards. There is another mode of "reality," or rather, of effectiveness. It is no longer "being," but evanescent—escaping a limiting grasp, yet operating indefinitely. In other words, it is a way of softening one's sentence (one's thought): dissipating and influencing, vanishing and invading, ambient and pregnant at the same time. We will have to make gradual shifts in our language to accommodate it and open up a register of the "evasive," which is the opposite of the assignable. Although "evasive" is commonly negative in French, as it is confronted with the prevailing requirement for determination — an evasive answer, as we know, is one that shies away, evades, and does not take responsibility — we must learn to reverse this choice to see what we miss in our experience. This choice is not only theoretical, but also, as Nietzsche would say, of our moral code of knowledge. The evasive is unconfined and capable of not being limited; it remains in expansion. It is the emptying out of a "self" and is therefore free from the consistency of a delimitable, appropriable "self" ("self as self"). If the characteristic of thought about Being is assigning, then moving beyond thought about Being is thinking about what can be productive in the unassignability of the elusive.
(François Jullien, Chinese thought in relation to philosophy, 2015)

E3.9.1_REF3_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN ARGUES THAT THE CONCEPT OF "COHERENCE" ALLOWS US TO BREAK FREE FROM THE WESTERN, ARISTOTELIAN RELIANCE ON FIXED "ESSENCE" AND "MEANING" by establishing a rationality based solely on "consistency"—the internal relationships that make things hold together—rather than on an underlying metaphysical substance.

"Coherence vs. Meaning"
2. [...] By establishing, from the point of view of logos, that 'a word means something and means only one thing,' and therefore meaning has unity, Aristotle establishes the purpose of speech as expressing the stable unity of things and speaking in terms of 'being.' He also institutes 'onto' logically. This unity of 'being' establishes the identity of the meaning of words, which Aristotle will call 'essence' or 'ousia.' Europe will base the condition of possibility of its knowledge on this essence, fixing it by 'definition.' Given how ingrained and global this concept is, the point of view of coherence seems crucial to me, precisely because of the bifurcation it opens up. It finally takes us out of the essentialist perspective of knowledge and introduces another way of describing things.
We cannot forget how much effort philosophy has made to break out of the essentialist perspective, recognizing its limitations but unable to make a new start. Phenomenology itself struggled with this, often being condemned to endless adjustments that still did not lift it out of this initial perspective established by language and grammar. However, the interest in thinking about a principle of coherence is that the unity is no longer the supposed unity of meaning and essence. Rather, it is a "holding together" that operates solely on the basis of internal relationships without the support of being and "substance." This ensures what I will call "consistency" — sticking to this purely associative cum ("with").  The connection alone makes things "hold together" by virtue of its power of correlation. This connection is comprehensible and establishes a rationality that rivals meaning. There is no need to imagine or invoke the base, the "under" (of "sub"-stance), the "behind," or the "beyond" (of metaphysics), the support, or the foundation. Relationality possesses sufficient effectiveness within itself to ensure the intelligibility of what exists. Therefore, consistency opposes essence as coherence opposes meaning or understanding opposes disjunction.
(François Jullien, Chinese Thought in Relation to Philosophy, 2015)

E3.9.1_REF4_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN ARGUES THAT TRUE EXISTENCE IS NOT FOUND IN THE STATIC "COINCIDENCE" OF BEING AND THINKING ESTABLISHED BY GREEK PHILOSOPHY—WHICH TURNS THE SELF INTO A SCLEROTIC, SUBSTANTIALIST "BLOCK"—but rather in the continuous, vital process of "de-coincidence," where life sustains itself only by constantly detaching from fixed essences and present states to open up new, undefinable possibilities.
"III. To live is to de-coincide.
One might think that living is coinciding. In fact, one could argue that this is the definition of living: being in uninterrupted coincidence with the world and oneself. This coincidence constitutes my perception, both external and internal, through which I feel […]. In fact, we could say that this same coincidence, bringing together its two meanings as simultaneity and congruence, defines my present. It is this present of coincidence that makes me alive. However, this overlooks two main things. First, this present moment constantly slips away; therefore, such a coincidence is suspect in principle. Above all, however, the capacity that makes life possible is the opposite. It is precisely because we never cease to de-coincide—to continually undo the coincidence we have acquired—that life proceeds. In other words, life is alive because we continually undo the coincidence we have acquired. We must understand living as renewal. Living is not prolonging the previous state with the intention of perpetuating it because the latter becomes sclerotic, unravels, and tends toward death by enduring. Rather, it means detaching from the previous state, disassociating from its coherence, and not continuing it, but rather constantly bringing about a new one. In other words, it means continually detaching from the adequacy that led to the so-called "present" state. As a result of its exhaustion, life begins anew. "To live is to continuously de-coincide from the previous state in order to continue living"

VI. How Negativity Promotes Existence
The simplest thing would be to keep negativity at bay. If anything threatens or even destroys the self, it would always come from outside because I am intrinsically united with myself in my effort to subsist within myself. Otherwise, the self would contradict itself. I would call this negative force assailing me from outside evil without hesitation. Such forces include illness, death, suffering, and anything that jeopardizes my survival. This classic conception of confining and containing the negative in adversity is still that of Spinoza. Before introducing his central concept, "everything, as far as it is in itself, strives to persevere in its being" (the conatus), he presents the preliminary logical idea that "nothing can be destroyed except by an external cause" (Ethics, III, Prop. IV). However, he presents it without further argument as a self-evident proposition, even though this is the weakest point of his thinking and thus its limit. It stops there, settling on what it no longer questions or suspects might escape it. Spinoza remains dependent on a substantialist conception of the self, confining it to its compactness as a "thing," and positing it as an unbreakable block that cannot detach or decouple from itself. It can only affirm its essence as defined and not "deny" it. [...]

VIII. Tomb of Coincidence:
If consciousness emerges from decoincidence, then the mind strives for coincidence. Any aim,
can only aim at coincidence (the target), and the mind is essentially 'aim.' Greek thought established the condition of possibility for such coincidence from the outset. According to Parmenides, "it is the same to think and to be." In other words, being and thinking completely overlap, and neither overflows the other. Consequently, thought cannot stray outside Being (if it does, then it is no longer truly thinking), nor can Being offer thought anything unthinkable. The two coincide not as two separate terms but because they belong to the same conformity, folding one into the other. This coincidence was then fixed and labeled under the notion of "essence," which divides Being into identifiable objects that are conveniently manipulable by thought. However, by focusing on "essence" and making it the target of the mind, thought abandoned "existence." Existence cannot be contained in an essence. Through the possibilities it opens up, existence escapes all definition. It can only be observed in experience and cannot be entered into any reasoning or deduction of the mind. Therefore, existence cannot be manipulated in any way by thought. [...]"
(François Jullien, De-coincidence: Where Art and Existence Come From, 2017).

E3.9.1_REF5_PH David Altmejd, Untitled, Bronze

"Before Homer, the narrative was mythological; he innovtes giving constancy to the identity of his characters - the character becomes an essence instead of being permeable and the siege of all kinds of metamorphoses imposed by external forces. From then on, all facts are subordinated to the principle of causality. Homer formulates for the first time the awareness of a conflict between the relative powers of our being and those of nature - a desperate battle on our end - at least as long as we are fixed on preserving our being. The observation of the irremediable conflict between our mind and the malignancy of the world marks the emergence of an existential attitude. The Odyssey celebrates the virtues of intelligence while inevitably encountering its limits."
(Pierre Bergounioux in the program Les chemins de al philosophie, broadcast on France Culture on 08/27/2019)

Listen to the podcast in French: https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/les-chemins-de-la-philosophie/lodyssee-dhomere-24-ulysse-le-raisonnable

E3.9.1_REF6_PH DEATH IS THE END OF "ALL POSSIBLE DISTANCE FROM SELF TO SELF.
"This fantasy of being someone else naturally ceases with death because it is I who dies, not my double. Pascal's famous words ('We die alone') aptly describe this unique existence in the face of death, even if that is not his main point. Death signifies the end of any possible spatial or temporal distance between oneself and oneself, and the urgency of coinciding with oneself. It is here that Rank's thesis finds profound meaning. Even more so does André Ruellan's proverb in his Manuel du savoir-mourir (Ed. P. Horay, p. 37): "Death is a rendezvous with oneself: one must be punctual at least once."
(Clément Rosset, The Real and Its Double)

E3.9.19.

E1.7.D.6.5.f_REF1_LIT.wE3.9.1.

"ULRICH REPLIED SHARPLY: « WHEN I THINK OF MY VERY YOUNG AGE, I WOULD SAY THAT THE INSIDE AND THE OUTSIDE WERE THEN HARDLY DISTINCT. When I crawled towards an object, the object flew towards me; when an event looked important to my eyes, I was not the only one to be moved by it: things themselves began to bubble. [...] I did not yet own myself; deep down, "I" was not yet, my personal states were not yet clearly separated from those of the world. It may seem strange, yet it is true to say that my feelings, my inclinations, that I myself was not yet entirely within myself. Even stranger, I could also say that I wasn't quite far from myself yet. Today indeed, as you think you are in full possession of yourself, if you wonder who you are, in the end, you will discover that you always see yourself from the outside, as an object. You will perceive that one occasion makes you sad and another furious, as your coat is sometimes wet, sometimes warm. By observing yourself, with all the attention possible, you will succeed, at most, in ending up behind yourself, never inside. Whatever you do, you stay outside of yourself, except precisely for the rare moments when the others would say about you that you are outside yourself. To compensate, we adults have been able to say "I am" on any occasion, if it pleases us. You see a car and in a way you see at the same time, like a shadow, the sentence: I see a car. You love, or you are sad, and you see that you are. Strictly speaking, however, neither the car, nor your sadness, nor your love, nor you are entirely there. Nothing is there entirely like it was in childhood. Everything you touch, as soon as you have succeeded in being a personality, freezes even within your deep intimacy. All that remains is a thin thread of self-awareness and troubled self-esteem, enveloped in an entirely exterior life. So what is wrong? We have the feeling that something could still be fixed but we don't know what. In fact how can we say that a child has absolutely different experiences from those of an adult? I don't have a definitive answer to these questions, although one or two thoughts come to mind. But it's been a long time since I've responded in my own way: by losing all love for this way of being "someone" and for this kind of world. »"
(Robert Musil, The Man Without Qualities, Volume 1, 1930)

E3.9.1_REF7_TH A_Christo_Packaging on a pram_1962

"The adult´s feeling of Ego cannot have existed from the start as it is. It must have undergone an evolution, which cannot be conceptually proven but can be reconstituted with a certain probability. The infant does not yet separate his Ego from the outside world as the source of sensations which flow over him. He learns this little by little, being exposed to various incentives. He can only be most strongly impressed by the fact that some of the sources of arousal, in which he will later recognize parts of his body, may communicate sensations to him at any time, while others withdraw from him sometimes - which is the case for what he desires the most: the maternal breast - and can only be brought back by cries of protest. Thus, the Ego is first opposed to an « object », namely something which is « outside » and can only be forced to appear again by performing a particular action and not before. Another impulse which pushes the Ego to detach itself from the mass of sensations, therefore to recognize an « outside », an external world, is given by the frequent, multiple and inevitable sensations of pain and displeasure which the pleasure principle - in its absolute mode of ruling - enjoins to suppress and avoid. Thus arises the tendency to separate from the Ego all that can become a source of such unpleasantness, to reject it outwards, to constitute a pure Ego of pleasure, facing a foreign and threatening exterior."
(Sigmund Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents, 1930)

E3.9.1_REF8_LIT A_Hasui Kawase, Spring Moon at Ninomiya Beach_1931

WE TRY TO "TIE" THE "EVER-FRAYING TAPESTRY OF STORY-LINES" INTO A "PERMANENTLY VALID CONCLUSION."
"In literature, when a storyline involves victim and a persecutor, we call it a drama. In life, most acts of aggression or complaint (which are two sides of the same coin: the emotional currency of existential malcontentment), most tantrums thrown by otherwise reasonable adults, most blamethirsty fingers pointed at some impartial reality, involve the self-victimization of drama. People prone to drama have not only cast themselves as victims of a perpetrator in a plot, but have tacitly conceded that there is a plot, which presupposes a playwright — some external entity scripting the story in which they feel done unto. The person self-cast into a drama is resigned to being a character, insentient to Joan Didion’s fundamental law of having character: “Character — the willingness to accept responsibility for one’s own life — is the source from which self-respect springs.” Wherever there is drama, there is a deficiency of self-respect and too shallow a well of self-knowledge.

The ways in which we are all susceptible to drowning ourselves into drama, and what it takes to float free, is what Iris Murdoch (July 15, 1919–February 8, 1999) explores in her subtle, splendid 1978 novel The Sea, the Sea (public library) — the story of a talented but complacent playwright approaching the overlook of life, who is ultimately overcome by his tragic flaw: Despite his obsessive self-reflection (or perhaps precisely because of it), his egotism ultimately eclipses his creative spirit — that brightest and most generous part of us, the part rightly called our gift, the part that extends the outstretched hand of sympathy and wonder we call art and invites, in Iris Murdoch’s lovely phrase, “an occasion for unselfing.”

"We are such inward secret creatures, that inwardness the most amazing thing about us, even more amazing than our reason. But we cannot just walk into the cavern and look around. Most of what we think we know about our minds is pseudo-knowledge. We are all such shocking poseurs, so good at inflating the importance of what we think we value. The heroes at Troy fought for a phantom Helen… Vain wars for phantom goods… People lie so… though in a way, if there is art enough it doesn’t matter, since there is another kind of truth in the art."
(Iris Murdoch, The sea, The sea, 1978)

A subset of the illusion of choice is the illusion of closure — the alluring but ultimately vain idea that, as life lives itself through us in ways far beyond our control, in a complex and by definition ever-fraying tapestry of story-lines, we can tease out any one narrative thread neatly enough to tie it into a complete and permanently valid conclusion. Murdoch dispels the vanity"
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

"Loose ends can never be properly tied, one is always producing new ones. Time, like the sea, unties all knots. Judgements on people are never final, they emerge from summings up which at once suggest the need of a reconsideration. Human arrangements are nothing but loose ends and hazy reckoning, whatever art may otherwise pretend in order to console us."
(Iris Murdoch, The sea, The sea, 1978)

"But here is where we do have choice: In accepting a hazy and uncertain reality beyond our control, we can also refuse to resign ourselves to being victims of it — the sort of adaptation Octavia Butler held up as the highest measure of intelligence and integrity. We can recognize that life is much more interesting as a process of continual presence than as an acted drama; that the world is much more interesting as a shoreline than as a stage — for it is at the living shore that we witness, as Richard Feynman did, “ages upon ages” unfolding into the wonder of life; at the shore that we are humbled, as Rachel Carson was, by “our place in the stream of time and in the long rhythms of the sea… in which there is no finality, no ultimate and fixed reality”; at the shore that we finally accept the most elemental fact of our lives: There is no final act — only shoreless seeds and stardust."
(Maria Popova, The Marginalian)

Read it in The Marginalian: https://www.themarginalian.org/2022/06/23/iris-murdoch-the-sea-the-sea/

E3.9.1_REF8.1_LIT TO BE SELF-AWARE IS TO STEP OFF THE STAGE (STAND OUTSIDE THE STORY) AND ACCEPT THE "SHORELESS" FLUIDITY OF LIFE.
"Loose ends can never be properly tied, one is always producing new ones. Time, like the sea, unties all knots. Judgements on people are never final, they emerge from summings up which at once suggest the need of a reconsideration. Human arrangements are nothing but loose ends and hazy reckoning, whatever art may otherwise pretend in order to console us."
(Iris Murdoch, The Sea, the Sea, 1978)

"But here is where we do have choice: In accepting a hazy and uncertain reality beyond our control, we can also refuse to resign ourselves to being victims of it — the sort of adaptation Octavia Butler held up as the highest measure of intelligence and integrity. We can recognize that life is much more interesting as a process of continual presence than as an acted drama; that the world is much more interesting as a shoreline than as a stage — for it is at the living shore that we witness, as Richard Feynman did, “ages upon ages” unfolding into the wonder of life; at the shore that we are humbled, as Rachel Carson was, by “our place in the stream of time and in the long rhythms of the sea… in which there is no finality, no ultimate and fixed reality”; at the shore that we finally accept the most elemental fact of our lives: There is no final act — only shoreless seeds and stardust."
(Maria Popova's review of Iris Murdoch's The Sea, the Sea, 1978)

E3.9.2. The Ontology of "Standing Outside": It is not just a choice but a structural necessity of reality. Nothing exists "in itself"; everything exists as a relation, a difference, or a perspective. To exist is to stand outside (ex-sistere).

E3.9.2_REF1_PH  "A being who was truly, exclusively saturated in a present moment wouldn’t be able to observe anything at all. Observation, any observation, installs a minimal distance from what it observes, for the simple reason that for any observation to take place, one here and now must be related to another here and now, and that relation needs to be registered by some trace or connector between the two. [...] 

The blur of the instant of change that is a logical prerequisite for stitching together any two moments in space-time inextricably inheres in the very reality being observed. […]

In a deep sense, then, the laws of physics, the laws that describe how things behave, are really the laws of our observations of how things behave."
(William Egginton takes up in The Rigor of Angels: Borges, Heisenberg, Kant, and the Ultimate Nature of Reality, 2023)

E3.9.2_REF2_SOC A_Roelandt Savery_Paysage montagneux avec un dessinateur

"In a famous essay, Panofsky showed how the invention of linear perspective in the first half of the 15th century brought about a new relationship between the subject and the world, between the viewer's point of view and a space made systematic, where objects and the intervals between them are only proportional variations of a seamless continuum. [...]
Where Bruegel, by removing humans from the landscape, simply makes manifest the exteriority of the subject which gives meaning and coherence to an objective nature, Savery reintroduces the subject into the pictorial representation by representing the very act by which man creates a distinct space from the one in which he is located, which is itself distinct from the space offered to the viewer because the perspective view presented to the latter is not the same as that the cartoonist is drawing on the paper, shifted to the left of the drawing but located in the very axis of the valley. In this landscape, therefore, we have a doubled objectification of reality, a somewhat reflexive representation of the operation by which nature and the world are produced as autonomous objects by the grace of the human gaze on them. "
(Philippe Descola, Beyond nature and culture, 2005)

E3.9.2_REF3_LIT A_Jana Euler_aspa aspa body_2016

WE ALMOST ALWAYS LIVE OUTSIDE OURSELVES.
"All movements of sensitivity, however pleasant they may be, are always interruptions of a state, which I do not know what it consists of, which is the intimate life of that very sensitivity. Not only the great concerns that distract us from ourselves, but even the little annoyances disturb a quietness to which we all unknowingly aspire.
 
We almost always live outside ourselves, and life itself is a perpetual dispersion. However, it is toward ourselves that we tend, as toward a center around which we, like planets, make absurd and distant ellipses."
(Fernando Pessoa, The Book of Disquiet, 1914)

In Jana Euler's aspa aspa body (2016), verything that is usually at the center is turned around_the center begins beyond the borders of my own vision.

E3.9.2_REF4_PO A_Félix Vallotton_Woman looking for something in a closet_1901

"Like the animal that survives in us, you will long seek refuge inside yourself and get trapped. 
When, moreover, does one stop toying with desire within oneself, stirring up the energies of the blood, searching one's memory or digging in one's heart? At which age and on which threshold? At the end of which fatigue, at the bottom of which burrow? 
Within us the theater. The gesture that lures, the body that poses. The others, are the verso. And the recto is encertain. 
Whether it is outside or inside, elsewhere or at home, under the tent or under the rain, you should know that you will never completely inhabit your skin, and that your skin will never dress you closely. 
Only the eyes of passers-by will serve as your clothing. For a long time."
(Michel Baglin, Woman's spray, 2012)

E3.9.2_REF5_PH I_The substantial channel of being ; I_The vectorial channel of being ; I_The thingly channel of being

A "THING" IS THE DYNAMIC DIFFERENCE BETWEEN WHAT ENTERS IN ITS COMPOSITION AND WHAT CONTAINS IT IN THE WORLD.
Tristan Garcia rejects both the classical "substantial" model (which creates a "compact," self-contained thing) and the modern "vectorial" model (which reduces things to ephemeral effects of events), proposing instead that a "thing" is the dynamic difference between the being that enters it (its composition) and the being that exits it (its place in the world).

"Introduction

[...]

This book tries to retain the ontological chance of each thing by considering each disposition of things as a direction of the circulation of being, justifiable so long as it is neither impossible nor makes itself impossible.

In order to clarify this idea, we represent possible distribution channels of being.
The first model consists in conceiving of being as circulating from things which do not exist by themselves: predicates and accidents. Let us allow the quality of an entity to be represented by an arrow projecting being, which the quality has, onto the being of an entity that the quality describes. If I aim at the being of some redness, the texture of denim, and some cut or pattern in the form of an hourglass, I can imagine three arrows carrying the being of redness, the being of denim, and the being of the form of an hourglass towards a fourth arrow: a dress which is red, denim, and in the form of an hourglass. And yet the dress is not predicated on anything, while the redness, denim, or form of an hourglass are predicated on the dress. The dress directs the circulation of being into itself, into its self. At the end of its flight, the arrow of the dress aims at nothing other than itself. In this substantial model of the distribution of being, the being of some secondary entities flows towards the being of primary entities which flows in a closed channel. Being’s channel is blocked by the in-itself, which acts as a necessary buffer against its circulation. A thing, in the strict sense, is thus constituted by the distribution channel of a self-sustaining being, and of beings sustained by this primary being. These qualities are like tributaries of a river – substance – flowing towards its own ocean and its own source. In this essentially ancient and classical way of dividing things – from Plato and Aristotle to Kant and Hegel, and implicit in Confucianism and Samkhya – there is clearly a hierarchisation between what is carried towards some-thing other than itself and this other thing which serves as its ontological support, supporting its proper being.

FIGURE 1: The substantial channel of being

The second model consists not in distributing being substantially, but vectorially. One thus conceives of trajectories of being, identified with events, facts, powers, intensities, or intentionality.
These vectors of being are primary. They carry, support, and displace being, but without ever obtaining an end point or objective consistency. In such a representation, what is in the world is not identity but difference, trajectory, becoming, a continuous projection of being which never leads to a compact being, closed upon itself. There is no in-itself. Being is never like the flight of a boomerang. Nothing is self-contained or sealed. The ontological plane is open and extends through flows, forces, and becomings. To account for the apparent existence of things, of identifiable and re-identifiable stable entities, this model views the possibility of determining figures at the intersection of different trajectories. These figures are sealed, like the sides of a triangle made of plumes of transient smoke emitted from three aeroplanes scanning the sky. An observer may have the impression of perceiving a triangle in the sky, a determined figure inscribed in the conjunction of three different events or trajectories. In this essentially contemporary vectorial model (found in certain Nahua philosophies of Mexico, Nietzsche, Bergson, and evolutionary theory), things are considered as secondary effects, constructions, or illusions at the intersection of several events or vectors of being.
Every epistemic domain – from cosmology to sociology (which divide spatiotemporal events or individuals into domains) and from biology to psychology (which define species within evolving processes or subjects among effects, actions, and reactions) – tends to secretly rely on models of the circulation of material, social, biological, or psychological being.
But every epistemic domain must not and cannot have anything except substantial ontologies and vectorial ontologies.

FIGURE 2: The vectorial channel of being

Each division of things is accompanied by the development of some distribution channel of being. And if we want to divide things in a flat world in order to section off the accumulation of objects (which prevents us from being and from comprehending the world), we must find a non-substantial and non-vectorial way of allowing the being of things to circulate. Substantiality tends to compact being in the final stage of its process, over-determining self-saturated things or things in themselves. The pure eventiality of the vectors of being tends to dissolve and disseminate being, and transforms things into effects, illusions, or secondary realities. Our concept of a thing fits neither the first nor the second model. The first produces a thing which is too much of a thing, which is ‘compact’, while the second generates a thing which is not enough of a thing, which is only a construction or ephemeral projection. Our aim is the following: to conceive of a model that is neither too strong nor too weak, and to represent things that are really in the world without being in themselves.
The only solution consists in constructing the following trajectory: being enters into a loop wherein being is not projected in itself, but cast outside itself. In our model, an arrow points inside to a circle – a thing – and then from this circle a second arrow points outside.
Being comes inside a thing and being goes outside it. A thing is nothing other than the difference between being-inside [l’être entré] and being-outside [l’être sorti]. Accordingly, the channel of being is never blocked. Inside a thing, a thing is never itself. A thing is not in itself, but outside itself. Nonetheless, being is not eventially ‘pollinated’ by vectors, but has an objective end-point. Things correspond to the circle indicating the gap, difference, and inadequacy between the entering arrow and the exiting arrow, and are inscribed or imprinted in the world.
To reinscribe things in the world is to situate them outside them-selves (as substances) and outside us (as subjects). It is to arrange them outside themselves (their self and ourselves) in the world. The price to pay for this arrangement is a circulation of being that systematically distinguishes two senses [sens] of things: that which is in a thing and that in which a thing is, or that which it comprehends and that which comprehends it.
Take, for example, a block of black slate, a random rectangular sample taken from a site of continental collision. Few people will deny that this block is a thing. One can of course point out that it is necessary to have an active subjectivity to divide or distinguish this block of matter lying on the ground of dusty soil, in order to perceive it as such. But this slice of black slate possesses certain qualities of cohesion and of solidity that allow one to dissociate it from its environment, handle it, transport it, and consider it quite simply as ‘something’. What is it composed of? It contains quartz, clay-like minerals, mica, some traces of feldspar. And all these components themselves have a certain atomic structure. But in a wider sense, they also enter into the constitution of the rock as ‘thing’: its rectangular form, the irregularities of its surface, the porphyroblasts coated with pyrite, its sombre color, its delicate texture, its weight, its fragility, and all the primary or secondary qualities by which we can recognise the black slate.

FIGURE 3: The thingly channel of being

We say that this is all that is in this thing, all paths of being that lead to the constitution of this black slate in my hand.
Yet, that in which this slate is can never be inferred from every-thing that is in this slate. From everything which composes it, I will not obtain the slate’s location in the world, the relations in which it inscribes itself, the fact that it is now in my hand, the function of a weapon that it can exercise if someone attacks me, its place in the landscape or in the series of slate pieces scattered alongside this valley. That which it is, this unique thing which exists in the world, and I hold in my hand, is outside itself. The slate can in fact enter into the composition of the side of a mountain, a roof, or a collection of rocks. As a whole, it then becomes a part of another thing, and it is no longer a question of that which is in the slate, but of that in which this slate is.
A number of things are in this black slate. The black slate on its own can enter into the composition of a number of other things. Therefore, the black slate is not in itself. It is not a substance on which various qualities are predicated – for example, its weight or its colour. No more is it an ephemeral entity, not existing in itself, constructed by my thought, senses, or action, from events or becomings (some variation in the matter’s density, some effects of geological transformation, a trajectory of luminous rays). No, the black slate is a relation, inscribed in the world, between the being that enters the world and the being that goes outside it, and that enters in turn into another thing (into the soil, landscape, classes of other objects, my perception, or the world in general).
A thing is nothing other than the difference between that which is in this thing and that in which this thing is. Unless one guarantees this double sense, there are no thinkable things. Every reductionist who claims to deduce that which this or that thing is from that which composes this or that thing only succeeds in dis-solving the very thing that they claim to account for. We attempt to accomplish the exact opposite of this: to guarantee things as invaluable differences embedded in the distribution channels of being of the world. To complete our task, we set out to discover the meaning which circulates among things, between that which composes them and that which they compose, inside or outside us, with or without us."
(Tristan Garcia, Form and Object - A Treatise on Things, 2011)

E3.9.2_REF5.1_PH A_Jiri Kolar_Self-portrait_1971 /Jiri Kolar/ ; A_René Magritte_The pilgrim_1966 /René Magritte/ ; A_Veruschka & Holger Trulzsch_Mimicry Dress  Art_1970-1973 /Veruschka & Holger Trulzsch/ ; 

SERIOUS METAPHYSICS: HANG ON! TRISTAN GARCIA ARGUES THAT CONSCIOUSNESS IS PERMANENTLY EXILED FROM ITS OWN BEING, PAYING THE PRICE OF NON-BEING FOR THE POWER OF COMPREHENSION.

"Tragedy
Tragedy is not exactly human. Rather, tragedy is human con-sciousness’ responsibility for the structure of the world: that what is does not comprehend itself.
In this way, tragedy is the consciousness of the inverse relation between being and comprehending: I will never comprehend what I am and I will never be what I comprehend. This relation exists for every thing. For example, the area of sand that comprehends many sand grains is not one of the sand grains which make up the area of sand; the beach does not exist on the same plane as the particles that compose the beach. This gap becomes tragic when it is assumed by consciousness – that is, by a cognitive activity capable of reciprocating or of making something of what makes something of it. This gap is the source of the human feeling of inadequacy between the structure of the world and the structure of every consciousness. Every consciousness considers as a thing what makes consciousness a thing (consciousness of the milieu, of the environment, of the physical universe, of familial, social, cultural, and linguistic determinations, and so on). But every con-sciousness also has access to the fact that comprehending (that is, making a thing) and being (that is, being a thing) are two opposite directions of the same relation. Every human action – interests in the animal kingdom, culture, science, an art, a social function, a community, contemplation, the body, love, friendship, action, and so on – discovers tragedy, which is not simply a tone, an accent, a certain colour of human narratives, a vague feeling, or a cultural construction, but the conscious way of assuming and confronting the inverse senses of being and comprehending. If I comprehend my object, I separate myself from this object, and I am not this object.
Though I may think that I comprehend myself, it is not myself that I comprehend, otherwise I would add myself to myself, I would comprehend myself comprehending myself, I would be an I-squared or a meta-I, so to speak. If I am this or that, then I do not comprehend this or that. Sometimes, with the passage of time, I fall from being to comprehending. How did I not see that I was this way! Nostalgia then is the relation splitting the time when I did not know that I was, and when I made something without knowing what I made. Not only mental comprehension, but every comprehension (for example, the act of holding a thing in one’s hand, enveloping this thing, and taking this thing in itself, or our relation to a part of ourselves) is a separation; this is the necessity of abandoning being. What I comprehend, I cannot be, am not, and am no more. On this view, there is no difference between being no more and not being. I have not assimilated or gone beyond what I comprehend; I am separated from this; I am not this.
This is the tragedy of the passage of time and ages of life. This is the tragedy of impotent consciousness. And this is the struc-tural tragedy that every dialectic – whether Platonist, Hegelian, Marxist, or negative – seeks to squander, arrange, or stage: that non-comprehension is a price to pay for being, that non-being is a price to pay for comprehending, and that no consciousness is to be gained from being.
I cannot thoroughly comprehend what I am: as long as I am what  I am, and as I am what I am, this escapes me. Who comprehends this? Another person? Society? A community? A god? Space-time? The world? Everything that I am not comprehends me. Only I cannot comprehend what I am. Every being is a beautiful idiot; everything except beautiful idiots comprehends what the beautiful idiots are. Beautiful idiots exist as such without ever being able to glimpse through the false mirror what others and what the world comprehends of them. These beautiful idiots will only ever have a completely indirect idea of a beautiful idiot, exiled as beautiful idiots are from themselves.
Every tragic feeling has its roots in the relationship of conscious-ness to being and to comprehension, which never face each other, but remain two sides of the same coin.
Tragedy is structurally in the world; in fact it marks the conjunc-tion of the two opposite senses of things, in the flat world as in the dramatised world of interests. The ‘flat world’ is the flatly tragic world; what is something does not comprehend this something; what comprehends something is not this something. The dramatic world is the world in which tragedy is brought out through action, thought, language, the consciousness of living beings, human beings: henceforth, tragedy concerns interests, aimed-at ends, wanted or desired things.
Humanity dramatises especially what is structurally tragic about the world by combining its interests with things that humanity is and that humanity comprehends, on the grounds of a non-human, long-tragic, and disinterested world."
(Tristan Garcia, Form and Object - A Treatise on Things, 2011)

E3.9.2_REF5.1.a_PH ATRISTAN GARCIA ARGUES THAT BECAUSE A "THING" IS DEFINED ONTOLOGICALLY AS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ITS CONTENT ("THAT WHICH IS IN THE THING") AND ITS CONTAINER ("THAT IN WHICH THE THING IS"), it is impossible for anything to be "in itself" without collapsing the very distinction that constitutes its existence.

"Nothing is in Itself

1. Spatial representational models are often employed to describe the possibility or impossibility of something, anything, being in itself. According to the idea of spatial location, something is within something else like I am within this room, that is, within either an intuitive or complex topologically determined space. On this view, the possibility or impossibility of a thing in itself depends on a given space.
2. Some claim that a thing is within another thing not only in a spatial sense, but also in a mathematical sense of set membership. Something would then be in another thing like two is in three, since an element belongs to some collection of elements. On this view, the possibility or impossibility of a thing in itself depends on given axioms.
3. Some also claim that a thing is in another thing not only in a mathematical or set-theoretical sense, but also in a very particular logical sense concerning predication and attribution. Something would then be in another thing like a sky which is blue is in  blueness. Everything which is linguistically attributed to  something comprehends in this way what the thing is attributed to. On this view, the possibility of a thing in itself depends on a given logical model.
4. However, here we understand the fact of ‘being in’ more broadly than in the context of spatial, mathematical, or logical models. If ‘being in’ were limited to these models, then it could always be objected that something can or cannot be in itself merely as a result of some topologically defined space, some mathematics, or some logic.
Yet, what is important is not only the ‘in’ in ‘being in’, which may refer to a spatial, logical, or mathematical model, but also the ‘being’. For us, ‘being in’ means precisely what ‘being’ may mean. If ‘being’ is equivalent to ‘being in’, it is not insofar as ‘in’ adds nothing to the meaning of being, but insofar as being directly means ‘in’.
5. To be in something and to be something are equivalent.
6. It is not necessary to define ‘being in’ according to a spatial model of that within which things are, but to understand the ‘in’ as being.
7. Being only is by two limits: that which is something and that which something is. No thing is as a whole another thing.
8. Every thing is defined by that which is in the thing and that in which the thing is.
9. Every thing is penetrated by that which is the thing, and penetrates that which the thing is.
10. Being is therefore the difference between two limits of every thing: that which is the thing and that which the thing is.
11. Being is ‘in’ because it is the difference between ‘in the thing’ and ‘the thing in’.
12. The possibility or impossibility of being in itself does not derive from a spatial, mathematical, or logical model, but from the model of ‘something’. If something is defined by the difference  between ‘in the something’ and ‘the something in’, by the difference between that which is something and that which something is, then how could something be in itself?
13. Our model of something does not entail that something cannot be in itself – because ‘something cannot be in itself’ is, rather, the very meaning of this model.
14. If something were in itself, then there would not be something.
15. That something may be in itself is not impossible, but simply the possibility that this something is impossible.
16. A thing is almost like a bag. There is what one places in the bag and what remains outside the bag. The question is: assuming that one can fill a bag with anything, can one place the bag in itself? If I grab the outside of the bottom of the bag, desperately trying to put it into its upper compartment, my exercise will more or less quickly reach its limit. At best, I will succeed in turning the bag inside out, such that what was its inside becomes its outside, and vice versa. In this case, I have inverted content and container without successfully making them one and the same.
So a thing is not exactly like a bag, for a thing is not a thin skin or layer. Rather, a thing is equivalent to an immaterial bag without layers. A thing is nothing other than the difference between that which is this thing and that which this thing is – between content and container.
17. A thing in itself is both that which is in the thing and that in which the thing is. It is therefore two selves simultaneously – the self which is and the self which the thing is.
18. A thing in itself would confound content and container, that which is in the thing and that in which the thing is.
To be in itself is to not make any difference between that which is and that which this is. Now, a thing is reduced precisely to the difference between that which is the thing and that which the thing is: its self."
(Tristan Garcia, Form and Object - A Treatise on Things, 2011)

E3.9.2_REF5.1.b_PH A_Edgard de Souza_untitled_1997_(1) ; A_Edgard de Souza_untitled_1997_(2) /Edgard de Souza/

TRISTAN GARCIA REDEFINES THE "SELF" NOT AS A UNIQUE FACULTY OF CONSCIOUSNESS, BUT AS A UNIVERSAL STRUCTURAL CONDITION SHARED BY ALL THINGS—from rocks to humans—arising from the impossibility of any entity fully comprehending or coinciding with itself, which permanently exiles it into a relationship with the outside world.

"Self

Everything has a self because nothing is in itself. The self is not the quality of what relates to itself (which is conscious, for example), or which thinks it does so. Nonetheless, for a ‘conscious’ being to relate to itself, it is necessary that this very relation be something other than the self to which it relates.
A cloud, like a record, a musical tune, a dust particle, a word, the echo of this word, or an infinitesimal part of this echo – all these things have a self insofar as they are something, they are not in themselves, and they are therefore not ‘themselves’. The self is what is forbidden to each thing in order for it to be what it is. The self is what we are not, what we cannot be, and that something else is, which is us.
The self is my being which escapes my comprehension. No thing can comprehend itself. A conscious being can merely comprehend its situation, that is, represent what comprehends it.
Consciousness is far from being the faculty of comprehending oneself (which always leads to a downward spiral of discourses about the self, continually chasing away what one recaptures, the commonplace of impotent modern consciousness from Monsieur Teste to Ulrich, ‘the Man without qualities’). Consciousness is the possibility of comprehending the world, that is, of doing the same to what comprehends us. We are only conscious insofar as we can turn to everything that comprehends us, to everything in which we are: physical matter, nature, culture, society, political structures, family, history, functions. But we ourselves do not comprehend ourselves, and we cannot comprehend ourselves. I do not com-prehend myself, society does not comprehend itself, nature does not comprehend itself: each thing is exiled from what it com-prehends, and situates what the thing is outside what the thing  comprehends.
The self is not something. The self is a process through which being and comprehension are mutually excluded, a process whereby what is a thing is not confounded with what a thing is.
Therefore, there is no self-consciousness. There is only con-sciousness of the world. The self is the shadow of a doubt of every-thing that casts some light. The self is what prevents every relation of self to self, and allows a relation to the world, to something other than itself. The self is only closed to itself as a thing is in the world. What is in itself goes outside the world, or, more precisely, is defined as ‘compact’, that is, as only being possible on the condi-tion of its failure.
The rock’s self is the process that precludes the rock being com-posed of itself, and that makes the rock be in something other than itself: a desert, the Earth, a topological model, a cognitive space, a postcard.
The rock’s self has nothing different from the human self, myself, yourself, a cat’s self, or an adjective’s self. Our self does not make us singular, but binds us to our common condition as things.
The impossibility of being myself is equivalent to the impossibil-ity of a rat being a rat itself, a drop of rain a drop of rain itself, the entire solar system the entire solar system itself – in other words, the impossibility of being a compact thing."
(Tristan Garcia, Form and Object - A Treatise on Things, 2011)

E3.9.2_REF5.1.c_PH TRISTAN GARCIA ARGUES THAT "BEING" IS NOT A PRIMARY STATE BUT A SECONDARY, RELATIONAL DIRECTION SYNONYMOUS WITH "BEING COMPREHENDED" or entering into something else, meaning that every "thing" exists as the difference between what it comprehends (contains) and what comprehends it.

"Being is Being Comprehended

1. Can one be without being something?
Either one is something (a thing is another thing: a lamp is a source of light), or one is something other than something (a thing is the world: a lamp is (in) the world, a light is (in) the world).
Either one is a thing, or one is the world.
Being nothing is still being something (since nothing is some-thing, even if it is only a word, a false concept, or the union between a before-thing, the negative contemporaneous with a thing, and the absence following the thing).
Therefore, being is not one member of a pair such as being and nothingness, being and non-being, being and becoming, being and beings. Being is not opposed as a whole to another thing.
2. Being has no opposite, but it has an opposite sense: comprehending.
Being this or being that is belonging to this or that, being in this or that. We say that this or that ‘comprehends’ that which is this or that.
The sense of ‘being’ is the opposite sense of ‘comprehending’. The sense of ‘comprehending’ is the opposite sense of ‘being’. Being can only be explained through comprehending, and vice versa.
3. Being is being comprehended. Comprehending is being been [être été]. The active sense of one is the passive sense of the other.
4. Being is a sense attributed to the relation between two things or between a thing and that which is not a thing.
5. Being is not primary, which means both that no being is in itself and that no being is before things. Being is secondary and the handmaiden of things, which means that being is the sense attributed to one thing in relation to another thing.
If being is secondary and things are primary, how can one claim or know that there is something? To have something, must some-thing not be?
6. To be something, the thing must be in something-other-than-itself; this is its only condition.
7. To be something, it is not first necessary that something be, but rather that both something and something-other-than-some-thing be, so that one may be the other.
8. If there is only something, then there is not something.
9. Something is, if something has something other than itself to be, if something is not compact.
10. Thing and world are in this way primary. Being and com-prehension make a thing be the world and the world comprehend a thing. Being and comprehension are secondary.
11. Comprehending something is ‘being been’ by this thing.
If I comprehend this, it is because this is in me. If that comprehends me, it is because I am in that.
12. Comprehending something is not the same as being this something. The whole comprehends the part, but the whole cannot be this part. If the whole were this part, it would then be necessary that the whole be in the part – in which case, this thing would be compact.
13. It is possible to be something if and only if this something does not comprehend this something.
One does not comprehend what one is. One is not what one comprehends.
14. Comprehending is having something inside itself. Comprehending is also comprehending an element by being a set; comprehending one quality by being a substrata of qualities; comprehending someone by appreciating or paying attention to this someone; assimilating a way of thinking or an idea; having a part when one is a composite; or comprehending a temporal, historical, or evolutionary moment in a longer timespan.
15. Being is belonging to something. Being is also having a quality; being an organism; being in a situation, that is, being situ-ated in some thing, and, more precisely, in a series of objects in each other, like Russian dolls but impossible to completely hierar-chise; being a body; being a history; being a social function; being a community; being a language; being a consciousness; or being a sexual organism.
But being is also being what is not something, namely, being the world.
Being the world and being in the world are equivalent.
16. Being is entering.
17. Being is not a mystery.
18. Being is a sense attributed to the relation between something and what contains this something, or between something and what this something contains. Insofar as no thing is as a whole, each thing enters and is entered. The direction from the entering to the entered, we call ‘being’. The direction from the entered to the entering, we call comprehension.
19. A thing is not a unit that one could arrange on a (material or thought) plane, so as to say: this thing is this or this thing is that, by identifying this thing with a name, idea, or something else as a whole. A thing always marks the difference between two senses or directions of being: that which enters into and that which goes out.
20. Being makes the difference between that which enters into a thing, and that into which the thing enters.
But what is the thing really? Does the thing have any consistency, like a thin layer of being separating what is in this layer and what this layer is in? Things really manifest a solidity or a matter, since I can touch them or hold them in my hand. Things have a matter, which is everything which enters into these things. But things are not their matter, since things are not in their matter.
21. One never grasps something as a whole. One divides some-thing and one can obtain it through one side of being or through another: through that which is the thing or through that which the thing is. But one will never reconcile the thing as a whole, as a very compact unit in my hand. For, if one made being a thing as a whole, without distinguishing that which is the thing and that which the thing is, one would situate the thing outside the world, and there would not be anything to be this thing.
22. The thing is primary, but it is dyadic. Being is simple, but it is secondary.
(Tristan Garcia, Form and Object - A Treatise on Things, 2011)

E3.9.2_REF5.1.c.i_PH TRISTAN GARCIA ARGUES THAT "BEING" IS NOT A PRIMARY STATE BUT A SECONDARY, RELATIONAL DIRECTION SYNONYMOUS WITH "BEING COMPREHENDED" or entering into something else, meaning that every "thing" exists as the difference between what it comprehends (contains) and what comprehends it. (continued)

"Being is Secondary

In French, ‘comprendre’ has the linguistic advantage of being easily grasped by its active and passive facets: to comprehend, and to be comprehended. The verb ‘être’ has a similar structure, which makes it something passive and something active. But the French language tends to confound the two sides of a thing into a misleading unity, a kind of mysterious compactness of ‘being’ – confusing that which is something and that which something is, as if they were the same thing.
In this way, being is often defined as ‘being is that which is’. But in this definition, that which is and that which this is are confounded. What being is is that which is. It is as if one could claim that what a bag is in is what is in the bag. Being appears to be conceived as the non-distinction between being which is and being which ‘is been’. Like all verbs, in fact, ‘to be’ has two facets that must not be confused: ‘to eat’ has the property of eating and the property of being eaten; likewise, ‘to be’ has the property of being and the property of ‘being been’. Being is always both sides of the coin: that which is, and that which this is. The best way of untangling this knot in being is to understand ‘to be’ like the verb ‘to comprehend’, but conversely. Being is being in, being comprehended. What does it mean that I am this or that I am that? It means simply that I am in this or in that, that that comprehends me. Being is always being something. Therefore, being is being a part of this something. In the sense of ‘being comprehended’, the verb ‘to be’ formally has but a single reference: the world. I am (in) the world and every thing is (in) the world.
In its other sense, the verb ‘to be’ (in a ‘passive’ sense, if you will) corresponds to the fact of comprehending. ‘Being been’ is comprehending. When I say that ‘the wall is white’, I am aware that I am claiming something about the wall. But in fact, I am primarily expressing my judgement about whiteness. I am saying that the wall is comprehended in whiteness, is among white things. I am not expressing a quality of the wall, being white. If that were the case, the wall would comprehend, among other qualities, the fact of being white, as if this quality were hung to the coat rack of the thing. No, rather, I am expressing a quality of whiteness. This whiteness can comprehend the wall. The wall can count within the set of what is white. In the sentence ‘the wall is white’, the thing is not primarily the wall, but whiteness. Otherwise, I ought to say that whiteness is the wall – that is, that the wall comprehends the whiteness in the things which compose this wall. Likewise, I often say ‘I am a person’. I think that I am expressing one of my determinations, namely, personhood. No, I am expressing one determination of the set of humanity which is able to contain and comprehend me. If I want to assert the fact that humanity counts among the things that compose me, I ought to say that a person is me – some personhood is in me.
What does this rhetorical inversion mean? Nothing, except that in a predicative expression the thing must be sought on the side of the predicate rather than on the side of the subject. This is, of course, an anti-substantialist method. Why is there no substance? Because in a sentence which talks about ‘being’, the subject is a component of the thing situated on the side of the predicate. The subject is always the part, and the predicate is the whole, the set. When I say that x is y, I mean that x belongs to y, that x is a part of y, that x composes y, and that x takes part in y’s matter – that is, x is comprehended by y. Since x is y, y comprehends x, y is external to x, and y is ‘outside’ x.
The first major consequence of interpreting ‘being’ as the inverse of ‘comprehending’ derives from the product of an ‘antisymmetric’ relation. It may seem that being is the sign of a symmetric identity relation: if a is b, then b is a. No! Being is antisymmetry par excellence: if a is b, then b cannot be a. Being means nothing other than this unidirectionality [ce sens unique].
If I am comprehended in something, then what I am in cannot be in me. If I am x, then x is not me.
The second consequence of interpreting ‘being’ as the inverse of ‘comprehending’ is that this antisymmetric relation reverses the linguistic categories of classical, substantialist philosophies. Being some thing does not mean comprehending this thing as some quality, determination, or predicate. No, being some thing is being in or counting as a part of this thing. Here, we do not consider a substance that could be its attributes and that could be predicated on nothing. We consider a thing which can be in another thing and in which another thing can be, provided that that in which this thing is and that which is in this thing are never  confounded.
Our concept of being has three dimensions.
First, we think that being is no big deal (the deal is the thing, things, and the world), since being is the handmaiden of things. For us, being is nothing other than the antisymmetric relation par excellence, which allows us to avoid the unit of identity [bloc d’identité], compactness, and the ‘mystery’ of a Being of  beings.
Second, we think that this antisymmetric relation is the inverse of what comprehending means: being is being in, being compre-hended – and this is certainly not comprehending. Therefore, being is completely without comprehending.
Third, being as ‘being comprehended’ presupposes a distinc-tion between that which is something and that which something is. The sense of ‘being’ as the opposite sense of ‘comprehending’ is a theory of things: something is saturated with something-other-than-itself, and saturates something-other-than-itself. Being corresponds to one of these two senses. Being is the handmaiden of things since it is on both sides of the coin: being comprehend-ing and being comprehended. Being is betrayed by confusing the two sides of being, making being into a solid, compact being – by which you would be something in the same way that something is  you.
A thing is never a unity, but always has two faces. How are things split? Can we simply divide a thing in two and claim that here is ‘that which is the thing’ and there is ‘that which the thing is’? How are the two sides distinguished?
By conceiving of a difference between that which is in the thing and that in which this thing is."
(Tristan Garcia, Form and Object - A Treatise on Things, 2011)

E3.9.2_REF5.2_PH A_Alexandre Mazza_No deserto o oasis somos nos [In the desert we are the oasis]_2016_(1) ; A_Alexandre Mazza_No deserto o oasis somos nos [In the desert we are the oasis]_2016_(2) ; A_Alexandre Mazza_No deserto o oasis somos nos [In the desert we are the oasis]_2016_(3) ; A_Alexandre Mazza_No deserto o oasis somos nos [In the desert we are the oasis]_2016_(4)

"THE SUBJECTIVE WORLD IS ALSO AN INTERSUBJECTIVE WORLD, THE WORLD OF ME AND YOU, AND DRAWING A LINE BETWEEN THE TWO IS NOT EASY, BECAUSE THE OTHERS ARE PART OF US."
(Siri Hustvedt, The Trembling Woman)

"By distinguishing between a part or mode of the universe pas-sively receiving variable intensities given to it, and a part or mode of the universe which produces and projects variable intensities, one makes the error of formalising objective things and of objec-tivising formal things. The world – what comprehends each thing – is merely flat, without intensity, equal. The universe of objects, which comprehend each other, is never flat; when things are together, nothing is flat. The universe of objects therefore becomes compact through the determination of a universe opposed to humanity and its interests, which would receive values without having them by itself. In the universe, everything already has value in some way before one gives it value, since objects are not alone in the universe, but among objects. Objects are therefore always either more or less. "
(Tristan Garcia, Form and Object - A Treatise on Things, 2011)

E3.9.2_REF5.3_PH A_Negative Handprint, Pech Merle cave

USING THE ANALOGY OF PALEOLITHIC HAND STENCILS, TRISTAN GARCIA ARGUES THAT WHILE A "LIMIT" IS A FINITE, CONTINGENT BOUNDARY THAT ISOLATES AN OBJECT, "form" is the infinite, negative continuity of the world that surrounds the object and establishes its existence.

"Hand Prints
That things have limits means that things are contained in some-thing-other-than-themselves, which, in order to be other things, are no less things. A limit is a thin layer that surrounds a thing and that is of the same nature as a thing. By tracing the limit of a thing, one creates a membrane around the thing, separating it from the rest of the world.
To establish a limit on a thing is to isolate it from the world. On the other hand, to give form to something is to establish it in the world. Form is infinite, whereas a limit is finite.
The early prehistoric human beings who made hand prints in caves perhaps intuitively grasped the difference between limit and form; placing their hands against the cave wall, they began to paint negatives of their hands. They perhaps understood that if by covering their hands with pigment they did not paint what constituted their hands, they ought to cover with pigment what their hands constituted – that is, the negative of their hands. By applying paint around the hand to draw its form, was there any reason for them to stop spreading the paint? The question must not lure one into the traps of some kind of fictional Paleolithic psychology. The question concerns rediscovering the primitive meaning of negativity and form. By beginning with their hands, the human beings who used them like stencils discovered an infinite possibility. When should they stop? Did the form of their hands have some limit? Yes and no. The form did not have a limit, since they could conceivably colour the entire world apart from their hands, cover up the whole of its negative, which begins without ever ending: form has no limit. Why should the form of a hand take up two centimeters of thickness, rather than three centimeters, a thou-sand, or a million kilometres? Form is not a thing; it ends only by the beginning, and not by the end.
At the same time, Paleolithic human beings, with whom some may sometimes identify, could have discovered that this impossibility of determining any end to the form of their hands, which were nothing other than the very world, is accompanied by mate-rial problems. Indeed, the cave wall only extended a few metres. The rock itself, after all, was not infinite, no more than the earth – even if Paleolithic human beings didn’t know it. Painting the entire world as the negative of our hands was inconceivable – how can one cover in black the sky and the stars, sounds and smells, ideas, and so on. The negative of our hands appeared as an unlimited form. But the negative of this hand was also strictly limited by non-inferential material conditions which were necessary. Painting the negative of the hand was not absolutely limited by the cave wall’s length, since, during the birth of the symbolic, one could have imagined painting the ground and mountain, and invented a means of making the sky entirely black – but objectively, even so, this operation seemed relatively difficult and limited.
On the contrary, what characterises form is that it is not a thing. A limit is what separates a thing from its form, like a quarantine line around a thing, isolating a thing from that which is not a thing – its form. A thing may be extremely limited, but it is still no less formed by its limits.
Since form delimits a thing, form cannot be delimited on its own. What stops is unstoppable: form. However, we determine a limit when we stop what stops. Unlike form, there is something contingent in a limit, which makes us continually question it. Look closely at the book that you are reading. This book is limited by the room in which it is, provided that it is in a room, just as it is limited by its time – it is enclosed in a place, in a time, in the consciousness that you have of it, in its economic value, and so on. If I put this book in a bag and close it, this bag captures it. This is yet another limit. But limits change and depend on a point of view, on interests attributed to a thing, on a scale of perspective. Does the bag or the house in which the bag is limit the book? If I come closer to the limit, I perceive an increasingly fine membrane around the thing, like a thin transparent layer. I begin to believe that this is the thing’s absolute limit, an immaterial line surrounding it, completing the total circumference of its geometric figure.
However, no thing is wholly in a spatiotemporal, geometric thin layer. What dimension could this thin layer that separates the object from the world entirely around it have? Does it have an infinitesimal dimension? Even if the limit were limited only at the limit, one could certainly not avoid the fact that this limit’s limit would naturally be arbitrary. Indeed, one can limit a thing’s limit, but it is we who limit it. Just because we limit it does not mean that this limit cannot be limited in an infinite number of other ways, with an infinite number of layers. A thing does not have one limit, but can have as many limits as one wants it to have or as one discovers it to have. What one does not choose is its form. One cannot limit a form.
Now, to be able to limit a thing, one must still limit it within the context of its form. A limit is a stopping point on the form of a thing. A limit is another thing that comes in between thing and world.
Form is always fixed with some thing, and, at the same time, fixes it elsewhere, for a reason. Limits can be established only relatively and in an interested way – unlike the form of a thing, which is without interest and not itself something."
(Tristan Garcia, Form and Object - A Treatise on Things, 2011)

E3.9.2_REF6_PO I_Blind spot

“I AM WHAT IS MISSING 
FROM THE WORLD IN WHICH I LIVE,
the one among all 
whom I will never meet. 
Revolving around myself, I now coincide 
with what has been taken from me. 
I am my own eclipse
my own absence and melancholy
the geometric object
that I will forever have to do without.”
(Valerio Magrelli, Ora serrata retinae, 1980)


"o sono ciò che manca 
dal mondo in cui vivo, 
colui che tra tutti 
non incontrerò mai. 
Ruotando su me stesso ora coincido 
con ciò che mi è sottratto. 
Io sono la mia eclissi 
la contumacia e la malinconia 
l’oggetto geometrico 
di cui per sempre dovrò fare a meno."
(Valerio Magrelli, Ora serrata retinae, 1980)

E3.9.2_REF7_PO A_Luiz Paulo Baravelli_The door_1987

"DOOR

a door 
like any frontier 
exists only to be crossed 
soon it is no longer of any use 
your body brushed through 
and you're already on the other side 
from her are born the outside and the inside
she is their emptiness".
(Ana Martins Marques, Interior Architecture, Life under water, 2009)


"PORTA

a porta 
como toda fronteira 
é apenas para se atravessar 
rapidamente ela já não serve mais 
um corpo a corpo 
e já se está do outro lado 
dela nascem o fora e o dentro 
ela que é seu vazio"
(Ana Martins Marques, Arquitetura de interior, A vida submarina, 2009)

E3.9.2_REF8_PH "EXISTENCE
is often synonymous with being. However, the etymology suggests a difference. To exist is to be born or found outside of something else. In other words, there is no absolute outside. It is to be in the world, in the universe, in space, and in time. For instance, we hesitate to say that mathematical beings exist. Even if God existed, he could not be said to exist in this sense, as Lagneau pointed out. "To exist is to depend," wrote Alain. "It is to be beaten by the external flow." If God existed, he would not be God since he would be part of the universe. Existence always presupposes existence outside itself and others. Its essence is not to have one. "The nature, even the inner nature, of all things is outside of them... Relationship is the law of existence"
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E3.9.3. The Strategy of De-coincidence: From Subject to Situation. It involves abandoning the "Subject/Will" model in favor of the "Situation/Potential" model, and cultivating a distance to liberate the self from its own heaviness.

E3.9.3_REF1_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN ARGUES THAT THE CONCEPT OF "PROPENSITY," ROOTED IN THE CHINESE TERM SHI, CHALLENGES THE WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL RELIANCE ON EXTERNAL "CAUSALITY" AND "EXPLANATION" by revealing the fundamental inseparability of "being" and "becoming," wherein a thing's evolution is understood as inherently implied within its present configuration.

"Propensity vs. Causality"
1. In order to think things through, we had to separate being and becoming. Is 'we' only the Greeks? [...]
We live in a black hole, not so much in the passage from one to the other, but in the inseparability of the two, in the idea that things are constituted by what they evolve into. This can also be read in reverse: things evolve from what constitutes them.
 In the terms of yesteryear, the event is in the structure. Propensity seems to me to be the most appropriate term to address this lack, to designate this inseparability, and to define it. It comes closest to the unthinkable idea of how things are driven by what they "are" and "are" by what drives them.
 How disposition implies inclination, and how inclination itself constitutes disposition. How evolution is not only contained in the configuration but is one with it and merges into it. I have found some support for this idea in the ancient Chinese term shi. Though not highly conceptualized, shi has been adopted in many fields, including strategy, power theory, aesthetics, and philosophy of history and first philosophy. As I read through the texts, I was surprised to find that, for the same occurrence, it can be translated equally well by one term or the other: "situation" or "evolution"; "condition" or "course of events."
At what point do the two come together to the point of discovering that they are communicative and, one might say, equivalent? This is a question that can never be fully illuminated by intelligence. [...]
The interesting thing about the concept of propensity is that it takes us out of the realm of causality and "explanation," which have reigned supreme over European knowledge, and introduces us to constant implication. The Greeks thought in terms of "cause" and "principle," with "cause" as the first and "principle" (arche and aitia, the two opening terms of Aristotle's vocabulary).
 We enter the "thing," in other words, through the "cause," causa, which derives its truth from the thing. We "give an account" (the famous logon didonai of the Greeks) of whatever being there may be from outside itself, which is made clear, at least symbolically, by the "ex" in "explanation." 
"To know" is "to know the causes of things," rerum cognoscere causas, says Latin sententiously, in a formula that would dispel the mystery of the world by placing it under this explanatory regime. [...]"
(François Jullien, Chinese Thought in Relation to Philosophy, 2015)

E3.9.3_REF2_LIT "AESTHETICS OF INDIFFERENCE [...]
The greatest mastery of oneself is indifference to oneself, considering one's soul and body to be the house and farm where Destiny wanted us to spend our lives.
Treat your own dreams and intimate desires haughtily, en grand seigneur, taking intimate care not to notice them. To have modesty towards oneself; to realize that in our presence we are not alone, that we are witnesses to ourselves, and that it is therefore important to act before ourselves as before a stranger, with a studied and serene exterior, indifferent because noble, and cold because indifferent." 
(Fernando Pessoa, The Book of Disquiet, 1914)

E3.9.3_REF3_LIT A_Maja Vukoje_Untitled & patata_2013

TURNING MY 'I' INTO THIN AIR
 “What I am going to confess to you now is really very curious; but I get the same pleasure from yielding up my egotism with people as I get from the malice with which I play the zany! Everybody I meet seems to want to assert their ego. « I! I! I! » they cry. No one seems to get the depraved pleasure I get from turning my « I » into thin air and helping my friend’s « I » to swell and swell till it’s a regular balloon.
My progress and track through Life can be easily followed by all the wonderful balloons that go sailing up to the sky; balloons that formerly were little miserable soap-bubbles! No one—not even my intimate friends—can possibly realize the shifts, the subterfuges, the evasions, the devices, the serpentine coilings, the mole-like burrowings, to which I am always resorting, purely and solely to ward off some hurt to their pride, some blow to their life-illusion, some loss to their self-esteem - and this with practically every person I meet! It is interesting that I should have thus been inspired to discover a way of « acquiring merit » unknown to any Christian cult. [...]
It really is curious why I should have come to have such a deep superstitious mania for trying to make every living entity I encounter think more highly of itself."
(John Cowper Powys, Autobiography, 1934)

E3.9.3_REF4_PH SEE QUE POUVONS-NOUS SAVOIR DES AUTRES

”A DEFECT OF STANDPOINT, NOT OF VISION.—We always stand a few paces too near ourselves and a few paces too far from our neighbour. Hence we judge him too much in the lump, and ourselves too much by individual, occasional, insignificant features and circumstances.”
(Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human II, Aphorism 387, 1878)

E3.9.3_REF5_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN ARGUES THAT EUROPEAN PHILOSOPHY, BY ESTABLISHING THE AUTONOMOUS CARTESIAN SUBJECT AS ITS ABSOLUTE STARTING POINT, EFFECTIVELY RENDERED THE CONCEPT OF "SITUATION" UNTHINKABLE, reducing the lived world to a passive "landscape" cut out by an observer's gaze rather than the immersive, relational reality found in Chinese thought.

"POTENTIAL OF SITUATION (VS SUBJECT INITIATIVE)
In retrospect, what ultimately shaped the destiny of European philosophy was its establishment of a subject-self as the starting point. This observation is unfortunately too banal to be reflected upon sufficiently: when I think, I begin by thinking not about the world or "things," as the Greeks did, but about the "I" that thinks. The subject posits itself as the primary and sufficient object, with the "world" coming only afterwards as a consequence. From this "I think," this insular cogito, whose first outlines were found in Augustine, Descartes was able to draw the thread from which the "land of truth" is in sight, as Hegel would say. The fact that the philosopher discovers his uncertain and unassured thinking by beginning with "doubt" is obviously secondary to that initial "I" on whose rock he was able to stand in order to begin. Or is this doubt itself essential since it is from this single "I" of "I doubt" that I discover I cannot doubt, however relentless my doubt may be? Through this hyperbolic doubt, which believed from the outset to embrace everything and from which we inevitably find the world in its place, what did Descartes unwittingly cut himself off from at the outset? He could later recover it, but only in dependence on this primary ego. He could no longer think of it as a whole, but only within the confines of the subject. What did Descartes definitively relegate to the realm of the unthinkable with this masterstroke?
The common response was to condemn him, arguing that he had cut himself off from the Other from the outset. This meant he missed the co-originality of the "You" and the "I," the "Other" and the "subject," and he isolated himself in his solipsism. While it's true that Descartes turned away from the Hebrew gaze from the beginning, is that all he lost by starting out that way? [...]
The subject or situation is where European thought diverged without realizing it. Returning somewhat repentantly to the decisive place of cogito, modern philosophy has been so attached to recalling and magnifying the great Other to atone for its fault. However, it has perhaps not paid sufficient attention to what was left out in a less obvious way because it did not know how to approach it. We have continued to think of the Subject to the detriment of the Other, which in Europe has remained nameless and faceless. We have only been able to conceive of what we call, at best, "situation" through an unsatisfactory and makeshift approach.
This contrast is illuminated when viewed through the lens of Chinese thought. Consider, for example, what we call "landscape," which is merely the natural and primary mode of the "situation." The concept emerged in Europe during the Renaissance when the concept of the subject began to take shape. Descartes then exploited this concept masterfully. The dictionary still defines "landscape" as "the part of the country that nature presents to an observer," who cuts it out from his perspective. The horizon changes according to his position. In other words, the subject stands before the landscape, outside of it, and remains autonomous. It does not compromise itself. In China, however, instead of "landscape," we say "mountain(s)-water(s)" or shan-shui. [...]"
(François Jullien, Chinese Thought in Relation to Philosophy, 2015)

E3.9.3_REF5.1_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN CONTRASTS THE WESTERN AUTONOMOUS SUBJECT, WHO IMPOSES A STATIC PLAN UPON AN OBJECTIFIED WORLD, WITH THE CHINESE CONCEPT OF "SITUATION" (SHI), WHERE THE STRATEGIST IS IMMERSED IN A DYNAMIC FIELD OF TENSIONS and achieves victory not through willful forcing, but by discerning and exploiting inherent propensities to ensure the enemy is defeated before the battle even begins.
“Or, as they say in Chinese, "feng-jing": on the one hand, "wind," which constantly passes and animates but cannot be seen; and on the other hand, "light," which brings visibility and promotes vitality. By saying this, the Chinese language-thought always names a correlation of interacting factors forming a polarity. The "subject" is not absent but immersed in this correlation of factors, which forms a polarity. It is immediately part of this field of tension from which it cannot detach itself. In other words, the subject does not emerge in an autonomous posture, as exemplified by the self-sufficient "I think," nor does it project its point of view onto the world by unfolding it like a panorama from its vantage point. The subject does not position itself as an object ("thrown" in front of it, "ob" — "jet"), on which its gaze comes to rest, which it can then sovereignly "observe." The landscape is no longer approached by a subject, as established by the famous Cartesian beginning. Rather, it is conceived as an investment of capacities that are reciprocally at work because they are both opposed and complementary. Within this, the subject is involved. The situation will thus refer preliminarily to this network of unlimited implications within which each person originally grasps themselves. This configuration is shaped by various tensions, and one can only free themselves from it through abstraction.
We can develop this idea of the situation further by returning to the Chinese term I started with. This term, shi, is translated as both "condition" and "evolution" and undoes the opposition between the static and the dynamic.
Once the situation reveals itself not just as a framework or context but as an active potential, its relationship to a "subject" is reconfigured. The strategist will no longer be the one who draws up a plan according to his objectives and projects it onto the situation. He will no longer use his understanding to conceive of what ought to be, nor will he use his will to bring it into being. This "bringing into being" implies forcing "understanding" and "will," the two master faculties of the subject of classical GE in Europe. The true strategist discerns the favorable and "promising" factors within the situation, not as they would ideally reconfigure it in their mind. They continuously gain momentum without others even noticing and turn the situation to their advantage. [...]
"So, instead of making a plan, I sketch a diagram of the factors and vectors at play. The lesson is that before engaging in combat, I must tip the potential of the situation massively in my favor. That way, when I finally engage, I have already won and the enemy is already defeated" (François Jullien, Chinese Thought in Relation to Philosophy, 2015).
(François Jullien, Chinese Thought in Relation to Philosophy, 2015)

E3.9.3_REF5.2_PH IN THE CHINESE CONCEPT OF SHI (SITUATION AS POTENTIAL), THE SUBJECT IS NOT AN AUTONOMOUS AGENT OF WILL BUT AS AN ADAPTIVE PARTICIPANT IN A TRANSFORMATIVE FIELD OF INTERACTION.
"Now, 'situation,' if I refer back to the European lexicon, refers to 'the set of circumstances in which one finds oneself,' as if that were sufficient. However, the plural form of 'circumstance' indefinitely fragments the situation, contrasting and juxtaposing it in spatial, temporal, and aspectual ways. Circumstance is what "stands" "around." But around what, if not the perspective of a sovereign subject that predominates from the outset? Far from being neutral, "circumstance" is a term that wrongly stabilizes and marginalizes. The subject represents itself as an island against which the shifting tide of circumstances crashes. Circumstances are therefore inevitably a source of "friction," as Clausewitz observed, since they arise unexpectedly in relation to the plan drawn up in advance, causing the latter to gradually fall short and stumble. However, viewing the situation as potential takes the opposite view of this negativity, turning it around so that, instead of adventitious circumstances standing as obstacles causing the model to slip, the evolution and dynamic renewal of the situation (what the term "shi" most strongly expresses) are what I can draw on to tilt the situation to my advantage. With my mind unencumbered by projections, I can gradually take advantage of the situation.
The consequences of this on an operational level and in terms of management are easy to deduce. From then on, there will be no need to worry about "chance" or "luck," the gods, destiny, or the fates. There will be no need to rely on a "stroke of genius" either. This is the other big hole in our rationality when we abandon all our pre-established plans and react instinctively to whatever circumstances arise. Victory is always the result of the potential of the situation at hand. As Sunzi succinctly puts it, in war, it "does not deviate." 
This means that the battle is won before it even begins, while the defeated troops are those who "seek victory only at the moment of combat," hoping for last-minute success. From this, we can deduce that a truly good strategist is one whose strategy goes unnoticed and therefore does not receive praise. They are so adept at identifying favorable factors in advance and developing the situation's potential to their advantage that when they achieve victory, everyone considers their success "easy" and undeserved because it seems to flow naturally from the situation and was a foregone conclusion. This "without merit" is the great merit, enough to leave the subject of glory disappointed. Understandably, China has not conceived of an epic. [...]
I am always involved in a field of tension between various factors and vectors, which, because of their correlation, are necessarily in a state of transformation. Within this field, I am continually interacting with these factors, and this interaction constitutes "me." The autonomy or independence of the subject is no longer absolute, but rather, it has scope as a margin of maneuver according to which one adaptively manages one's conduct. Thus, one does not radically detach a "pure" "intention" that abruptly transcends everything given; rather, one's "good" or "bad" will is in play. [...].
(François Jullien, Chinese Thought in Relation to Philosophy, 2015)

E3.9.3_REF5.3_PH “SUBJECT/SITUATION: A FORK IN THE ROAD OF THOUGHT [...]
Chinese language and thought provide no similar history of the advent of the subject. [...]
Hence, the ethical aspiration is not "autonomy," "being one's own law," as in Stoicism, nor is it freedom, conceived in classical European thought as the primary property of a subject. Rather, it is the opposite: not strictly its contrary, but its contradiction, expressed by availability. The essence of freedom is transcending any situation, whereas availability is openness to a situation without projecting anything onto it that would hinder it, to the point that the consistency of a "subject" is undone. The key word in Confucius's teachings is, "When it is appropriate to take on a responsibility, he takes it on; when it is appropriate to leave it, he leaves it." Everything depends on the situation encountered. It is by conforming to the situation—that is, by departing from any position of principle toward it—that he promotes morality on every occasion. Wisdom is knowing how to be in tune. His ethics therefore do not proceed from rules but from continuous regulation. When it is said of the Master that he has no "idea" to put forward, no "necessity" to which he would hold in advance, no "position" to which he would adhere, or finally, no "self" in which he would become bogged down, this negative formulation suffices to indicate what an obstacle the establishment of a subject would constitute in the face of a changing situation. However, when all these markers or expected reference points underpinning an identity are removed, morality consists of responding to all the possibilities of the situation without missing any. In other words, it means embracing its entirety so as not to sink into "error" (the obsession of philosophy) or partiality.
I will translate these phrases precisely because of their resistance to translation, as is said about some ancient thinkers who "got wind of the Tao." They are at the limit of what can be translated, not because their ideas are obscure, nor because their meaning is unclear, but because they simply do not fit. Rather, they systematically undermine the possibility of doing so, as seen in Zhuangzi, chapter 33, about Shen Dao and his associates.

Impartial and non-partisan, 
easygoing and without anything special, 
decisive without [anything] directing, 
tend toward things without duality, 
do not attach yourself to cogitating, 
do not strive to know, 
select nothing from things, 
always go with them...

Without a stated grammatical subject and therefore without a recognized attributive function, such formulaic expressions undo the anchoring in the self. They dissipate its consistency and, initially, its relevance. Through continuous slippage, they say everything: the non-rupture with the world, the non-retrenchment in thought, the non-choice among possibilities, and the non-withdrawal from the compossible. [...]
The principle is to "hold all things equally." One cannot do what the other can, and vice versa: "Heaven can cover, but cannot carry; Earth can carry, but cannot cover; the vast Way can embrace, but cannot distinguish." By realizing that all things and beings have their intrinsic possibilities and impossibilities, we understand that "choosing" is flawed because it cannot "hold everything," and that "instructing does not ensure success," and the way is to "neglect nothing." This is why Shen Dao is said to "free himself from knowledge" and "renounce the self" (qu ji). He shows himself to be "fresh," "light," and "disposed" (available), like water or wind in relation to things (ling tai). In this way, he conforms to the regulatory coherence of the Way. Always "changing," he assumes no responsibility. He mocks the so-called Sages and lets himself go with the flow, unencumbered and without imposing morality on himself. He embraces diverse situations "in their twists and turns," eliminating disjunctions. In this way, he can survive and avoid embarrassment. "Pushed, it moves forward," "pulled, it follows"; "like the wind, it twirls"; "like a feather, it spins." Holding itself in "completeness," it is "without rejection" or regret. It knows no harm in "establishing a self." In short, it floats without anchoring itself in the situation. Could we go further in terms of non-construction, non-imposition, and the unraveling of the image and sentence in the non-constitution of a subject?"
(François Jullien, Chinese Thought in Relation to Philosophy, 2015)


E3.9.3_REF5.4_PH FRANÇOIS JULLIEN ARGUES THAT EUROPEAN PHILOSOPHY HAS HISTORICALLY SUBORDINATED THE CONCEPT OF "SITUATION" TO THE DOMINANCE OF THE "SUBJECT"—linguistically evidenced by the term "circumstance" (what stands around a center).
“If we consider "subject" and "situation" as two competing concepts, as I am inclined to do here, then we must understand why the concept of "situation" has remained underdeveloped in Europe under the ascendant reign of "subject": why it has not become autonomous but remains dependent on "subject," which keeps it under its tutelage or within its sphere of influence. Let us pause on the term "circumstance," as the dictionary defines "situation" as a "set of circumstances": something that "stands around" or "surrounds," according to the composition of this word. This is a European term: peri-stasis in Greek and Um-stand in German. But what does it stand around if not the perspective that a subject projects onto the world, around which the situation is envisaged? [...]
It must rigorously 'circumscribe' itself in order to possess itself, and it measures and tests itself against it. Has Stoicism not simply exploited this image, which is much more than an image since it is the way language has constructed its morphology? Now, imagine a language such as Chinese, which has no morphology and therefore no declension. Its system of prepositions has remained rudimentary. What remains of this device, in which the subject imposes itself on the situation and dominates it on its own initiative, even when it must tragically succumb to it?
Has European thought ever emerged from this submission of the situation to the subject? Sartre was the first—or at least the best known—to propose a concept of situation. Far from undermining the cultural biases involved in this representation, he confirms and endorses them. [...]
In the short version of Existentialism Is a Humanism, Sartre considers the concept of situation immediately after reaffirming the "absolute truth" of the cogito as the only possible foundation of thought. This makes it clear that the logic is seamless and the thought continuous.”
(François Jullien, Chinese Thought in Relation to Philosophy, 2015)

E3.9.3_REF6_PH NIETZSCHE WARNS THAT WITHOUT ARTISTIC DISTANCE, WE WOULD BE "NOTHING BUT FOREGROUND", TRAPPED IN THE "SPELL OF THAT PERSPECTIVE WHICH MAKES WHAT IS CLOSEST... APPEAR AS IF IT WERE VAST."
"What should win our gratitude.- Only artists. and especially those of the theater, have given men eyes and ears to see and hear with some pleasure what each man is himself, experiences himself, desires himself; only they have taught us to esteem the hero that is concealed in everyday characters; only they have taught us the art of viewing ourselves as heroes-from a distance and. as it were. simplified and transfigured-the art of staging and watching ourselves. Only in this way can we deal
with some base details in ourselves. Without this art we would be nothing but foreground and live entirely in the spell of that
perspective which makes what is closest at hand and most vulgar appear as if it were vast. and reality itself.
Perhaps one should concede a similar merit to the religion that made men see the sinfulness of every single individual
through a magnifying glass, turning the sinner into a great, immortal criminal. By surrounding him with eternal perspectives.
it taught man to see himself from a distance and as something past and whole."
(Friedrich Nietzsche, The Gay Science, Aphorism 78, 1882)

E3.9.3_REF7_PH A_Pieter Schoolwerth_Diamond Residence (Rigged n3)_2021_(1) ; A_Pieter Schoolwerth_Diamond Residence (Rigged n3)_2021_(2) ; A_Pieter Schoolwerth_No Body Get a Head_1991–2020 /Pieter Schoolwerth/

TO EXIST IS TO STAND OUTSIDE THE "ADEQUACY-ADAPTATION" THAT CLOGS LIFE.
"De-coincidence" is a concept that is both genetic and logical. It tells us what kind of break in order (in adequacy) is at stake in the mode of self-deployment. It takes us back to the beginnings of separation while helping us understand the internal reason for this deviation from the self. From this deviation, a new possible "self" emerges. It is from within adequacy itself that a disengagement is introduced. By stabilizing and sterilizing itself, or by adapting and deactivating itself, a normality is undone, reopening the possibility of a future.

In this sense, de-coincidence is a concept that not only expresses the vocation of art, but also—and above all—of existence. To de-coincide is to step outside the adequacy of a 'self,' its adaptation to a world, and to do so alone. That is what it means to truly exist. If "to exist" literally means "to stand outside" (from the theological Latin exsistere), then it means standing outside the adequacy-adaptation, which, when filled, becomes obstructed and no longer allows things to happen or be invented. While the thought of Being aims at immobilization in the stability of essence and the identical and the thought of life risks limiting itself to metabolic renewal alone, the thought of existence highlights the de-coincidence that fractures the self's adequacy with itself and its adaptation to itself. This brings the self out of the paralysis of such a "self," reopens an inner disengagement rather than a dissociation, and liberates initiative once again. Life promotes itself to existence, and becomes alive and qualifies itself by de-coinciding with itself, opening a breach in its acquired normality (its accepted functionality), and daring to "deviate." In short, it undoes any possibility of essence. [...]

Practicing decoincidence (of life, customs, and thought) is not aimed at demonstrating independence or shocking others. Rather, it is the only way to achieve existence. If we do not separate ourselves from the "environment," the group, and the herd—including the solidarity and conviviality that are theirs, such as Sunday dinner—and if we do not disassociate from the implicit agreement secreted there, then we will have renounced this requirement. [...]
Therefore, freedom unfolds through decoincidence. If we no longer believe that freedom is given to us from the outset by a metaphysical condition—that is, if we no longer want to remain stuck in the classic, disappointing contradiction of natural necessity (observed) versus the freedom of the spirit (postulated)—we will understand that effective freedom can only be achieved by breaking free from our adaptation to the world. In other words, effective freedom is achieved by opening up a margin of play and choice by shifting away from the world's normality and functionality and thus taking the initiative as the promoted "I" of the subject. In other words, only "man" can de-coincide from himself and his world. Only man can disadapt and introduce distance and perspective into the totalization and integration that make up the world. According to this formula, only man "exists."
(François Jullien, De-coincidence: Where Art and Existence Come From, 2017)

E3.9.3_REF7.1_PH TO LIVE, WE MUST BREAK THE “COINCIDENCE THAT WOULD BE A DEAD END," WHERE "NOTHING MORE CAN HAPPEN". 
"The fortuitous or the adapted?

We could stop there, at this fierce refusal—this refusal to coincide in terms of both existence and art, the two finding themselves united. This is in the name of a necessary fissure in the famous 'adequacy,' which no longer allows itself to be deceived by it—death. Contrary to what logic teaches, coincidence is actually a dead end or constitutes the 'aporia.'" [...]

Moreover, we can see that these two logics are rooted in two rival traditions. The first is the rational (Greek) tradition of knowledge based on the principle of the concordance of Being and thought. The second is the paradoxical (Christian) logic of existence, the "folly of the Cross" opposed to the sophia of the Greeks. John says, "Whoever wants to keep his life—whoever wants to coincide with it and adhere to it—by that very fact 'loses it.'" According to the first tradition, which is oriented towards Being, the ambition to establish the coincidence of adequacy is indeed to touch the absolute of Being. However, in the second tradition, which is oriented towards the Other, it is the preserved distance that, by letting go and remaining open to infinity, saves it from the appropriation of adequacy. The relevance of adequacy is simultaneously its limitation and what renders it sterile. [...]

In other words, that coincidence is not coincidental; it is evident in the fact that it has two divergent meanings. On the other hand, coincidence means a chance encounter, or "falling with the other at the same time" (co-in-cidere), which is impossible to justify. This "falling" is "pure coincidence," and the relationship is only one of simultaneity. As such, it cannot hide its contingency, which is indeed a matter of chance or "incident." Yet, it is through such coincidences that everything seems to have begun. One must be present at the same time as the other and be able to cross paths with the other for something to happen. Pollen grains must fall on stigmas; a sperm must meet an egg. Otherwise, nothing would have been created. A coincidence had to occur between them, one that could have easily not happened. In the infinite possibilities, this chance encounter had to occur for such an event to happen. "Strange coincidence!" we say, unable to add anything else. [...]
However, this is the opposite of the original historical meaning of "coincidence," which implies control. It is a geometric term that signifies when one line or surface is perfectly superimposed on another, just as paint completely covers a canvas. In other words, when coincidence means that one is perfectly adequate and adapted to the other. [...]
Coincidence no longer means the random intersection of two things, but rather, the complete conformity of one thing to another, such that nothing exceeds or is lacking, and nothing more can happen.

Therefore, we should pause to consider this internal dissidence within coincidence and its inability to align its two meanings, rather than glossing over it. I am always surprised by how easily dictionaries juxtapose the various meanings of the same word, which can diverge greatly, without further explanation. If these two meanings of coincidence—chance encounter or assured adequacy—do not coincide, and if they conceal a separation that is disturbing because it remains unspoken and unacknowledged, then shouldn't we see this as an inherent, irreconcilable flaw that cannot be bridged by thought? Perhaps this is the flaw that discourse constantly covers up without reducing it: the fundamental ambiguity that reason cannot dispel. In this ambiguity, our questioning about what constitutes "reality" is lost. Between chance encounters and justified adequacy, between randomness and adaptation, what bridge can we hope to build? Can we simply assume that if a chance encounter occurs, an adaptation must have preceded and prepared it? That in what appears to be chance, hidden adequacy was at work? However, the fortuitous nature of the encounter, "pure coincidence," cannot be eliminated.
Perhaps it is that, in the internal play of this concept, between chance encounters and perfect matches, we can identify the internal play of reality itself. But it did not allow itself to be approached any further. It remained unapproachable. This fundamental interplay, which thought cannot grasp, is not so much that of "chance" and "necessity," tuché and ananké, as the Greeks represented it, nor is it the inherent contradiction of life as we have made it. While chance and necessity are diametrically opposed, they still understand each other, leaving us with the hope that they will one day be reconciled. What resists thought is not so much the opposition, even if it appears to be a contradiction, since the negative still serves as a structure and can tip one into the other. Rather, as in this case, it is the discreet hiatus—the lack of agreement, or rather, the unattainable agreement, between these two meanings that are casually grouped under the same word, which can mean either one or the other—the non-connection, or non-relationship, between the two; the gap and discrepancy that remains between them, which cannot be resolved. Such a game (of reality) cannot be sufficiently understood or integrated, and the two divergent planes under the same word would only meet by pure coincidence—it is impossible to make them coincide any further. For convenience, we can call these two planes, on the one hand, the plane of the event (which happens by pure coincidence), and, on the other hand, the plane of the structural (where one can coincide completely with and be in line with the other). The gap between these two planes is the gap specific to reality. It is both that which causes reality to elude us and that which confronts us with the resistant effect of reality.
(François Jullien, De-coincidence, Where Art and Existence Come From, 2017)

E3.9.3_REF7.2_PH THE VOCATION OF THE SUBJECT IS TO "LEARN TO LEAVE ONESELF".
"Toward an Ethics of Decoincidence [...]
Detachment and disengagement are ethical strategies that call for decoincidence to free life from its confinement within its own world. These strategies wash away the positivity secreted by normality, shake life out of its inertia, and restore its momentum, however uncertain it may be.
Because the logic of decoincidence is at the root of ethics, it applies to our relationships with others and with ourselves. In one's relationship with oneself, decoupling from oneself means decoupling from the relationship of adequacy and adaptation that leads to the formation of a self that stabilizes into what is known as one's 'character.' However, the existing subject's vocation is not to be reduced to this "self," this "ethical" self (which is no longer ethical), or this ego that makes up the self. Rather, it is to regain its initiative vis-à-vis this self that is locked in its own world and no longer emerges from the rut of a self that has become "equal" to itself. We now know and can predict how this self will behave every time—alas!—as it is no longer capable of the slightest "protrusion" outside itself but is condemned to rumination. What we call moral "evil" or "vice" comes from the fact that the self no longer breaks away from what it has become through a fixed agreement, but instead locks itself in, becoming stuck to the point of being unable to attempt anything else. According to this "normalized" inner coincidence, which becomes blocked and can no longer be cracked, we can understand even the ordinary monstrosity of camp guards. On the other hand, learning to "leave" and dissociate from oneself, chipping away at the coincidence one maintains with oneself—in which one finds comfort and complacency—and maintaining oneself in continuous transformation is the condition—and I believe the only one—for promoting the subject. And this applies just as much to the life of thought: seeking to decouple oneself from the way one thinks, from the way one's thinking has become attuned to itself and remains assured of itself, is the only way to keep one's thinking active, alert, and not inert. [...]"
(François Jullien, De-coincidence, Where Art and Existence Come From, 2017)

E3.9.3_REF8_PH BARTHES DEFINES THE NEUTRAL AS THE "SUSPENSION OF ORDERS, LAWS... AND DOGMATISMS." It is the refusal to take a fixed position in the "story line" of conflict or contestation. It stands outside the binary of "for or against."

"THE DESIRE FOR NEUTRALITY [...]

Therefore, I say that the desire for neutrality is the desire for the following:

First, it is the suspension of orders, laws, threats, arrogance, terrorism, formal notices, demands, and attempts to seize.

Secondly, by extension, it is the rejection of pure discourse of protest. It is the suspension of narcissism, no longer being afraid of images, and dissolving one's own image, which borders on negative mystical discourse or Zen or Tao.

Neutrality continually presents a paradox as a desire: as an object, it is the suspension of violence; as a desire, it is violence. Throughout this course, it will be necessary to understand that there is a violence of the neutral, but this violence is inexpressible. There is also a passion of the neutral, but this passion is not a desire to grasp. I sometimes recognize this passion in myself in the calm with which I welcome the spectacle of "desires to grasp" and dogmatisms. However, this is discontinuous and erratic, as desire always is. It is not a matter of wisdom but of desire."
(Roland Barthes, The Neutral, Lectures at the Collège de France, 1977-1978)

E3.9.3_REF9_PH "REFLECTION
In the broad sense, it is a particular effort of thought. In the narrow sense, it is a return of thought to itself, which then takes itself as its object. Along with sensation, this latter movement is one of the two sources of our ideas, according to Locke. Without it, we would have no idea of "what we call perceiving, thinking, doubting, believing, or the idea of 'what we call perceiving, thinking, doubting, believing, our soul'" (Essay, II, 1, S 4). Reflection is therefore an intellectual and deliberate kind of inner sense: it is the knowledge the soul has of its various operations through which the understanding forms ideas" (ibid.). This movement is necessary but cannot exhaust the field of thought on its own. Marcel Conche advises in Présence de la nature, II, that it is better to philosophize in the manner of the Greeks than to shut oneself up in reflexivity, as Descartes and Husserl did. It is better to think about reality (to reflect, in the broad sense) than to watch oneself think (to shut oneself up in reflexivity, in the narrow sense). The self is certainly part of reality, so thinking about the world also means thinking about oneself. However, it is only a tiny part of it. Thinking about oneself has never been sufficient for thinking about what is or what it means to be alive. Logic and neurobiology teach us more about thought than reflection does. As Alain says in Cahiers de Lorient, I, p. 72, it is better to think about thought than to think about oneself. It is better to reflect (in the broad sense) on what we know or believe we know than to settle into reflection (in the narrow sense). "Thought," Alain said, "must have no other home than the entire universe; only there is it free and true. Outside oneself! Outward!" (Ibid.). Reflection leads to everything, provided one emerges from it."
(André Comte-Sponville, Philosophical Dictionary, 2001)

E3.9.4. Once the "story line" is dropped and the "self" de-coincides, what remains? A fluid, "conniving" relationship with the world in the flow of time.

E1.6.D.3.7.a.iii.1_REF1_PH.wE3.9.4.

"CONNIVANCE (VS. KNOWLEDGE) 1. In the face of knowledge and its hegemony over European culture, how can we name its other, which it has overshadowed and not taken into account? I will choose to call this other relationship to the world that knowledge has tended to bury, but has not been able to abolish, and whose "coherence" I must recall in the face of this established domination of knowledge. For the fact that knowledge, in its development into speculative knowledge, that is, knowledge for knowledge's sake, has detached itself, through science, from the need to adapt itself to the world from which it emerged, and has taken itself as an end in itself, has detached itself from the vital, now gives us this strictly correlative task: that of returning to that relationship which has been buried by reason and which, operating therefore in the shadows, nevertheless keeps us in a tacit understanding with things - but an "understanding" which we do not reflect upon. This "understanding" therefore remains implicit, beneath the relational work that reason itself performs, and which we can only illuminate by making reason retrace its steps, go back in its history, explore what it has strayed from: not what it heroically fought against (obscurantism versus enlightenment), but what it had to leave aside in its legitimate and powerful struggle to assert itself - and which now lies dormant, thus escaping our understanding. If, as we know, the opposite of knowledge is ignorance, its opposite is the collusion that is established with it on an equal footing, while at the same time turning their backs on each other. Connivere, as the Latin says: to get along "by winking".
For knowledge isolates a "nature" and turns it into an "object," methodically organizes its course, develops tools of abstraction and constructs mediations, renders spaces indifferent and projects an equal and planned time; it develops an argued discourse that promotes the conditions of science as well as politics. But is that all there is to knowledge? Doesn't life presuppose a mode of intelligence or, better, of "understanding" that, woven over the course of days, and even without us thinking about it, without us thinking about thinking about it, is held in adherence, instead of being distanced and edified in thought? For is knowledge not only the illuminated side, which is only made possible by its insidious reverse, to which it refers, but also by forgetting itself? Knowledge that is shadowy, that remains integrated in an environment, that does not abstract itself from a landscape, that does not extract itself from a conditioning, that does not separate theory from practice, that does not detach an "I" from the world: it remains below any possible exposure, above any explicitness, and above all, it does not question. 
Complicity is that knowledge that has not broken its attachment. [...]"
(François Jullien, Chinese thought vs philosophy, 2015)

E3.9.13.a.


E1.6.D.3.7.a.iii.1_REF2_PH 

FRANÇOIS JULLIEN EXPLORES THE NOTION OF LANDSCAPE AS A RELATIONSHIP OF CONNIVANCE WITH THE WORLD, WHERE OBJECTIVE OBSERVATION IS TRANSFORMED INTO A TACTILE UNDERSTANDING. Criticizing European Romanticism for its tendency to project subjectivity onto landscape, he proposes an approach in which landscape becomes a partner that awakens an affective and spiritual dimension. 
"There is 'landscape' when my cognitive capacity switches and is reversed into collusion; when the relationship of objectification, and above all of observation, that I maintain with the world is transformed into tacit understanding and communication: from knowing that I was vis-à-vis the 'country' (the knowledge of geography), I become collusive again in a landscape. Not, strictly speaking, that I "personify" elements of the landscape, or that I "project" myself into them, or that I lend my subjectivity to things, or that I animate the inanimate, as has been said and rehashed, as if to compensate for the rationalism of knowledge, the ordinary romanticism, the chatty romanticism, in Europe - all operations in which the subject still wants to be the master and which are only devices. But this transformation does take place: when the land becomes landscape, what I perceive in it is no longer alien to me, but beckons to me, "speaks to me," "touches me," as we say colloquially (but can we ever escape this colloquialism?). That is to say, as the Chinese literati painters so beautifully expressed it, that the perceptive becomes affective at the same time, or that I perceive then from within as from outside of myself; through this, that a dimension of infinity or of spirit then emanates and is released from the physicality of things, with which my mind "understands" (softly, as the Chinese strategically put it). The land becomes a landscape - do we know, or rather "do we really know", but the Chinese language of thought has proved particularly gifted in expressing this implicit, when this "corner of the land" establishes itself as a partner, the tension that it promotes integrates me and is shared: there is "landscape", in other words, when a relationship is established (re-established) with this "country" that makes me go back upstream - finds its source on this side of that which is established by knowing reason; when the place suddenly becomes a "link"; and when this "corner of the country" thus "becomes the world": when I connect with it as with that which makes the world. [...]
At the same time, there is no fusional shift, no compensatory slide into the ecstatic or the mystical, as so much bad lyricism in Europe has advocated, so I do not indulge in any irrationalism (this is an upstream of reason and not its polemical denial), where the famous "communion" or symbiosis with nature, which comes as reparation for knowing reason, at least leaves ambiguity hanging in the air. [...Let it not be a subject self that projects itself into the landscape, making it the confidant of its emotion (which I have just stigmatized as the banal attitude of bad romanticism), but let it be the landscape that, by setting itself apart, draws me into its field of tension, in resonance with its variation (the landscape is like a bow "that has played on my soul," said Stendhal), brings back - from beneath the mind that asserts itself as autonomous (the insular subject that knows and wants) - my more original belonging to the world: a world that has emerged from its indifference and to which my vitality is bound. [...]

"To tell the truth, we live in the alternation of these two registers, or rather of these two regimes [...] I press more on one key or the other of my inner keyboard; I constantly move the cursor between one pole and the other. Because we live by moving discreetly from one to the other, and in this agility, by advancing (asserting) the knowing, or by retreating, conniving, regressing from our autarkic self. Now, the ideal for the knowing subject is modeling. But how can we go one step further and name the other side of this, the side that has remained in the shadows, which means that the capacity is acquired and grows, but silently, without even paying attention to this continuous process, until we finally see the result?"
(François Jullien, Chinese thought vs philosophy, 2015)



E3.9.4_REF1_SOC A_Jennifer Tee_Subtle planes~Spirit Matter_2013_(1) ; A_Jennifer Tee_Subtle planes~Spirit Matter_2013_(2) /Jennifer Tee/

"Dualism is not bad in itself and it is ingenuous to stigmatize it for purely moral reasons, in the manner of the ecocentric philosophies of the environment, or to make it bear the responsibility for all the evils of the modern era, from colonial expansion to the destruction of non-renewable resources, or the reification of sexual identities or class distinctions. We owe at least to dualism, with the bet that nature is subject to its own laws, a formidable stimulation for the development of science. We also owe to dualism, and its belief that humanity is gradually becoming more civilized by disciplining its instincts and by controlling nature, some of the improvements, particularly political ones, which the aspiration to progress were able to generate. Anthropology is the daughter of this movement, of scientific thought and of the faith in evolution, and there is no need to be ashamed of the circumstances of its birth nor to condemn it to disappearance in order to atone for its youthful sins. But its role does not accomodate well with this heritage; we need to understand how peoples who do not share our cosmology have been able to invent for themselves realities distinct from ours, thereby testifying to a creativity that cannot be gauged against our own achievements. However, this is what anthropology cannot do when it takes for granted as a universal matter of fact of experience our own reality, our ways of establishing discontinuities in the world and of detecting relationships we believe are constant, our ways of distributing entities and phenomena, processes and modes of action, in categories that we believe are predetermined by the texture and structure of things."
(Philippe Descola, Beyond nature and culture, 2005)

E3.9.4_REF1.1_SOC A_Luca Izzo_Desformes 06

"The desocialization induced by the colonial process engendered dramatic upheavals, which the missionaries aimed to correct by dispensing education. It is by this means, in fact, that a consciousness of individuality was born and inscribed in an autonomous body. Old Boesoou leaves little doubt about this in his response to Leenhardt, who inquired about the effects produced by schooling:
- In short, is it the notion of spirit that we have brought to your thinking?
And he objected:
- The spirit? Bah! You did not bring us the spirit. We already knew of the existence of the spirit. We were proceeding according to the spirit. What you have given us is the body."
(Philippe Descola, Beyond nature and culture, 2005)

E2.2.A.3.wE3.9.4.

“TIME IS NOT A RIVER BUT A SEA

Time is not a river but a sea,
Holding all that was and is to be.
It is the mind that moves across the story,
Racing with the wind upon its glory,
Tracing through the will one's destiny.
Years shimmer in their drowned eternity.

The problem is, of course, identity,
Having the impression we are free.
Remember that the Earth does not seem round.
Each eve the sun sinks slowly towards the ground,
Even as we choose to take our tea.”
(Nicholas Gordon, Philosophical poems, 2002)

E3.9.4_REF2_LIT P_Shomei Tomatsu_Sumie, a multiracial girl_1958

SEGALEN STRIPS "EXOTICISM" OF ITS COLONIAL/TOURISTIC CLICHÉS (PALM TREES, CAMELS) TO DEFINE IT PURELY AS "THE NOTION OF THE DIFFERENT; THE PERCEPTION OF THE DIVERSE; THE KNOWLEDGE THAT SOMETHING IS NOT ONESELF."
"First and foremost, clear the ground. Throw overboard everything that is misused and rancid in the word ‘exoticism’. Strip it of all its trappings: palm trees and camels; colonial helmets; black skin and yellow sun; and at the same time get rid of all those who used them with silly loquacity. [...]
Then strip the word exoticism of its solely tropical, solely geographical meaning. Exoticism is not only given in space, but also in time.
And very quickly arrive at a definition, at establishing the sensation of exoticism, which is nothing other than the notion of difference; the perception of diversity; the knowledge that something is not oneself; and the power of exoticism, which is nothing other than the power to conceive of the other.
Having arrived at this gradual narrowing of a notion so vast in appearance that it seemed, at first, to encompass the World and the Worlds; having stripped it of the countless dross, smudges, stains, ferments, and molds that such long use—so many mouths, so many prostitute and tourist hands—had left on it; finally possessing this concept in the form of a clear and vivid idea, let us allow it to take shape again, and like a seed, this time pure, to develop freely, joyfully, without hindrance but without overload; to seize all the sensory and intelligible riches it encounters in its expansion and, swelling with everything, in turn to embellish and revive everything.
This mode of thinking is none other than the infinitely free mode of Hindu thought. Hindus think, and such a particular principle immediately tends to become universal (see Oldenberg, Le Bouddha).
However, there are born travelers in this world—exotics. They recognize the unforgettable jolts given by moments such as I have described beneath the cold or dry betrayal of phrases and words. They will acknowledge that, without contravening the two formidable laws mentioned, this highlights the essence of the interplay of these laws: the subject's intoxication when conceiving of its object, knowing itself to be different, and feeling the diverse. No doubt, nothing more will be invented. But I hope that for them, the flavor will be greater and more tenacious, and the freedom of its play will be excessive. It is for them that I write."
(Victor Segalen, Essay on Exoticism, an Aesthetic of Diversity, 1908)

E3.9.4_REF2.1_LIT "LET US NOT FLATTER OURSELVES FOR ASSIMILATING CUSTOMS, RACES, NATIONS... BUT ON THE CONTRARY REJOICE IN NEVER BEING ABLE TO."
"Individualism

Only those with a strong sense of self can perceive differences. According to the law that every thinking subject presupposes an object, the notion of difference implies an individual starting point. Those who know themselves and what they are not will fully enjoy this wonderful sensation.

Exoticism is not the kaleidoscopic state of the tourist or the mediocre spectator but rather the lively and curious reaction to the clash of a strong individuality against an objectivity that it perceives and savors. The sensations of exoticism and individualism are complementary.

Exoticism is not an adaptation. It is not the perfect understanding of something outside of oneself that one embraces within oneself. Rather, it is the acute and immediate perception of eternal incomprehensibility.

Therefore, let us start from this admission of impenetrability. Rather than flattering ourselves by thinking we can assimilate customs, races, and nations, let us rejoice in the fact that we can never do so. This allows us to enjoy the enduring pleasure of feeling the diverse. This raises the question: Does increasing our ability to perceive diversity diminish or enrich our personality? Does it steal something from us, or does it make us more abundant? There is no doubt that it enriches it abundantly with the whole universe [...]".
(Victor Segalen, Essay on Exoticism, an Aesthetic of Diversity, 1908)

E3.9.4_REF2.2_LIT SEGALEN DEFINES THE "POWER OF DIVERSITY" AS A DYNAMIC PROCESS WHERE THE SUBJECT MUST ACTIVELY ENGAGE ("EMBRACE AND MERGE") TO CREATE THE SENSATION OF DIFFERENCE. It is not a static binary (Black vs. White), but a lived relation or gap.
"Essential Exoticism"

[...] Verbally, if we are to believe the words, there is an exacerbation of exoticism in the antinomies. Not only do these notions differ, they are also directly opposed to each other! If flavor grows with difference, then what could be more delicious than the clash of irreconcilable contrasts?
Yet, when you consider it, there is such harshness and dryness: White and black. Black and white.
Analysis: The power of diversity contains two phases, one of which is reducible. One of the divergent elements is us. In the other phase, we observe a difference between two parts of the object. This second phase must be reduced to the first if we want to turn it into a sensation of exoticism. Then, the subject embraces and merges with one part of the object for a time, and diversity emerges between it and the other part. Otherwise, there is no exoticism. Realizing that the object is not an object does not cause the emergence of the diverse. Rather, it is simply an intellectual operation of a mathematical nature—the simplest one, in fact: addition. In library science, it is cataloging. This is the beginning of the exact sciences. It is not exoticism.
However, in the presence of antinomies and categorical oppositions, the mind must take sides. Can it do so? Good or evil? Continuous or discontinuous? And so many others. Sympathy is difficult. Drawing lots is unconvincing. The spectator will have no inclination toward either. Exoticism will not arise. [...]

L'Expertise et la collection. Réunir des objets qui parfois n'ont qu'une qualité qui est de différer légèrement entre eux est encore un hommage, - grossier parfois - rendu à la Différence. Le collectionneur croit vulgairement, ou est cru, réunir un lot de « semblables » ou analogues pièces... Quelle erreur ! C'est dans la Différence que gît tout l'intérêt. Plus la Différence est fine, indiscernable, plus s'éveille et s'aiguise le sens du Divers. Rouge et vert? Que non pas ! Rouge et rougeâtre, puis rouge et rouge avec un divisionnisme sans limite. L'agglomération des objets facilite le jugement qui les « discerne », le « discernement ». Toute série, toute gradation, toute comparaison engendre la variété, la diversité. Séparés, les objets semblaient vaguement semblables, homogènes; réunis, ils s'opposent ou du moins « existent » avec d'autant plus de force que la matière, plus riche et plus souple, a davantage de moyens et de modalités nuancées. [...]"
(Victor Segalen, Essay on Exoticism, an Aesthetic of Diversity, 1908)

E3.9.4_REF3_PH TO LIVE IS TO REFUSE THE "SLACK TIDE" OF A FIXED IDENTITY.
"SOARING (VS STASIS) [...]
This is why it is legitimate to consider the rigor of non-contradiction and the depth of ambiguity. This allows us to establish the vocation of science and determine being. It also allows us to probe what logically escapes science in living.
In other words, we must separate the logic of living from the logic of 'being' or ontology. I see no way to grasp the concept of life without first entertaining this suspicion and taking this requirement into account. One excludes the other, even if I think between the two. The thought of living and the question of being—that is, the consideration of growth, essence, or even non-coincidence and determination—are competitive with each other. The Greeks, when they thought under the hegemony of the "question of being"—which they did not always do, as Heraclitus and the Stoics show us—made us miss the other. If "being" is known by coincidence because it is stable, and its determinative character delivers it to the definition of science, then living can only be apprehended by de-coincidence. In order to think it, we must develop a new logic from scratch. [...] 

Living, in its momentum, is nothing other than de-coinciding with oneself, dispossessing oneself, or leaving oneself in order to become oneself. The essence of living in its intensity is that it cannot be confined to any property, or in other words, it is always transcending the "self." Coinciding with oneself is death. More bluntly, when we coincide completely with ourselves, we are dead. [...]"
(François Jullien, Chinese Thought in Relation to Philosophy, 2015)

E3.9.4_REF4_PO I_The mediating void

LAO-TZU HELPS US RESOLVE THE PARADOX OF A LIFE THAT RECONCILES BOTH ADHERENCE TO THE PARTICULARITY OF THE PRESENT MOMENT AND OPENNESS TO THE UNIVERSE.
"Those who observed the Way refused to be filled. Thus, never being filled, they could remain preserved and escape premature completion"
(Lao-tzu, chap. XV).

Through these quotations, we see that Lao-tzu was concerned with duration. For him, duration implies adherence to the Way. It means remaining in order to live, living without dying, and dying without decaying. If human life is a journey through time, it is important to incorporate what he calls the Return within that journey itself. The Return is not seen as a stage that comes only 'after'; it is simultaneous with the journey, a constituent element of time. How can one engage in the process of becoming and growth, which necessarily involves distancing and particularization, while simultaneously effecting the Return (to the Origin)? Through the Void," replies the Taoist. In the linear development of time, the void introduces the circular movement that connects the subject to the original space each time it intervenes. Thus, the Void, which resides within the Origin and at the heart of all things, once again proves to be the guarantor of life's proper functioning within the Time-Space framework. Since living time is an actualization of vital space, the void is a kind of regulator that transforms each stage of life into a space animated by vital breaths. This is an indispensable condition for achieving true fulfillment."
(François Cheng, Void and Fullness: The Pictorial Language of China, 1991)

“Lost within immensity
all presence is a pivot
Around which the universe
revolves, suddenly close and intimate”
(François Cheng, The Book of the Mediating Void)


"Perdue au sein de l‘immense
toute présence est pivot
Autour duquel l’univers
tourne, soudain proche intime"
(François Cheng, Le livre du vide médian)
